Title: Platform architecture determines whether recommendation algorithms can shape information quality on social media

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.19204v1

Published Time: Wed, 20 May 2026 00:33:37 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
# Platform architecture determines whether recommendation algorithms can shape information quality on social media 

## Mohammad Hammas Saeed a,1 , David A. Broniatowski a,1 , Joseph Simons a,1 , Erica Gralla a, Manan Suri b, and Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia b,2 aGeorge Washington University, Washington DC, USA 

bUniversity of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA 

1M.H.S. (Author One), D.A.B. (Author Two), and J.S. (Author Three) contributed equally to this work. 

> 2

E-mail: gciampag@umd.edu 

## May 20, 2026 

Abstract 

Social media platforms shape public discourse through two fundamental design choices that naturally co-occur in any field investigation: platform architecture, which defines what types of actors exist and how they interact, and recommendation algorithm, which deter-mines what content is surfaced to users. Using agent-based simulation, we orthogonally manipulate both factors, exploring four prototypical architectures – tree (e.g., Reddit), lay-ered hierarchy (e.g., Facebook), network (e.g., Twitter), and complete graph (e.g., TikTok) – and two algorithms: chronological (LIFO) and popularity-based (Hot). Drawing on prior the-ory that identifies and ranks canonical system architectures in terms of their flexibility we hypothesize that algorithmic effects on information spread and quality should be largest on the most flexible platforms and smallest on the most constrained ones. We find strong confir-mation of this prediction. On tree-like platforms like Reddit, the algorithm has no detectable effect on information spread and quality. On layered hierarchies and networks like Facebook and Twitter, respectively, the Hot algorithm has modest positive effects on both the spread of information and its quality. On complete structures like TikTok, the Hot algorithm leads to a winner-take-all dynamics that has strong negative effects on both information spread and quality, making the relation between content quality and popularity unpredictable. These findings imply that architectural considerations are more powerful levers than algorithmic interventions for the design of healthy online spaces and public discourse. Platform reform efforts focused exclusively on algorithm choice may be insufficient on architecturally uncon-strained platforms and unnecessary on architecturally constrained ones. 

1

> arXiv:2605.19204v1 [cs.SI] 19 May 2026

Social media platforms are used by billions of people worldwide for information access, net-working, and civic participation. Their ability to disseminate content at scale with minimal cen-tralized oversight has raised concerns about the spread of low-quality, misleading, and harmful information. These concerns have intensified as platforms have come to play a central role in public health communication, electoral discourse, and crisis response, calling for reform of these technologies [25]. Two platform design choices are widely believed to shape these outcomes. The first is platform architecture – the high-level design specification that defines, among others, ( i) what types of actors exist on a platform (e.g., individual users, moderators, pages, subreddits, and channels), (ii ) what types of connections are permitted among them (e.g., following, subscribing, group membership, and moderating), and ( iii ) what actions each actor type is permitted to take over these connections. There is growing consensus among scholars and technologists that current platforms dot not fully explore the full design space of all possible specifications [17, 34, 21, 10, 11, 29]. The second design choice is the recommendation algorithm – the ranking and filtering logic that determines which content, among all that is architecturally accessible to a user, is actually surfaced in their feed [15]. There is an increasing body of evidence suggesting that algorithms shape key qualities of what content is amplified – in particular its informativeness, emotional charge, and quality [13, 16, 3, 31, 23, 27]. Recent proposals for reform of social media are largely focusing on this latter aspect [24], by giving users and regulators greater control over recommen-dation algorithms – for example, through algorithm auditing, increased algorithm choice, or the decentralized algorithm marketplaces being piloted by platforms such as Bluesky [18, 26]. These proposals rest on an implicit assumption: that algorithms are the primary lever through which platform design shapes information quality, and that architectural differences among plat-forms are either less important or can be held fixed while algorithms are varied. At the same time, theoretical frameworks have formalized how architectural differences among platforms can be measured and compared along a flexibility spectrum [8, 32]. This prior work suggest that differ-ent platform architectures may constrain the efficacy of policy and algorithmic interventions by platforms in different ways. Retrospective analysis of the attempts made by Facebook to reduce the amount of vaccine misinformation in circulation on its platform during the COVID-19 pandemic have shown that the architectural affordances of that platform (an example of a ‘flexible layered’ architecture; see Table 1 for a list of canonical architectures and their possible instantiations) allowed motivated users to circumvent easily its content policies on vaccine misinformation. As a result, vaccine-skeptical content became more misinformative and more likely to appear in the newsfeeds of users despite sustained removal efforts by the platform [10]. Similarly, the architecture of Twit-ter (an example of a ‘network’ architecture) was associated with increased virality and decreased information quality among vaccine-skeptical accounts following platform-wide content moder-ation actions [11]. Despite growing regulatory and scholarly attention to these matters, the relative importance of architecture versus algorithm in determining the spread and quality of information on social media remains poorly understood. This is in part because architecture and algorithm are gen-erally confounded on real platforms. The hierarchical architecture of, e.g., Reddit and its (until recently default) chronological feed co-occur, as do the flat open-access architecture of TikTok and its engagement-based algorithm [10, 11]. This co-occurrence makes it impossible to isolate 2the causal contribution of each from observational data alone. It also limits the extent to which causal evidence on the effects of both policy and algorithmic interventions from one platform generalizes to different platform contexts. At present, no concrete system or testbed exists that would allow one to manipulate in a sys-tematic way both the architecture and algorithm of a real social media platform. Nonetheless, if architecture is the primary driver of either (or both) information spread and quality outcomes – and if algorithmic effects are contingent on architecture rather than independent of it – then reform efforts focused exclusively on algorithm choice may be insufficient, or may produce quali-tatively different effects on platforms with different underlying architectures than those on which they were studied. Lacking systematic ways to measure the impact of these two variables inde-pendently of each other, we turn to computer simulations of a model social media system to at least test the assumptions underpinning current attempts to reform social media without the ambiguities of purely narrative explanations. To do so, we define and analyze counterfactual worlds populated by independent, identi-cally distributed populations of agents drawn from a common probability distribution over agent attributes. We then orthogonally vary platform architectures and recommendation algorithms across eight conditions defined by the factorial combination of four architectures (Reddit, Face-book, Twitter, TikTok) and two algorithms: a chronological algorithm in which agents review content in reverse order of production (Last-In-First-Out or LIFO), which represents the pre-personalization default on most platforms, and a popularity-based algorithm in which content is ranked by accumulated engagement (Hot). Holding the agent-generating process fixed across conditions ensures comparability and isolates, within the context of our model, the main and in-teraction effects of platform architecture and recommendation algorithm on our simulated out-comes. At every time step in our model, an agent is selected at random to become active. With some probability ppost , an active agent can post a new message. Else, if the agent did not post a new message, with some other independent probability pshare , the agent reviews all the messages in its feed (i.e., it is exposed to them) and decides whether to re-share one of them, as long as ( i)its quality exceeds the individual quality preference threshold of the agent and ( ii ) its magnitude exceeds the agent’s likelihood to share content. Finally, regardless of these previous actions, an active agent picks a message to like in its feed, chosen in proportion to its motivational appeal. Both of these forms of engagement (sharing and liking) are meant to capture individual differ-ences in sensitivity to content quality. (See Supplementary Information for a full definition of agent and message characteristics, and for the simulation loop pseudocode.) Content quality varies continuously from −1 (low quality) to +1 (high quality) and is a mea-sure of its informativeness. Each message carries two additional properties that determine its strength or magnitude: whether it conveys a meaningful gist representation (illuminating power) and whether it is motivational (motivating valence). These choices are inspired by a prior model of information sharing whose predictions have been validated against observational data [9, 4, 5]. These properties could allow us in principle to distinguish demand-side explanations for infor-mation, in which content quality and individual quality preferences determine what circulates, from supply-side explanations rooted in platform architecture and algorithm, which determine what content agents are exposed to in the first place. Agent population size, as well as the distributions of content quality and of agent quality pref-erences, are explicitly modeled as features of the simulation and held constant across conditions. 3This choice allows us to estimate, while controlling for individual differences in quality preference and content composition, the effect of algorithm and architecture on several outcomes related to the spread of messages. For each message we define its ‘reach’ (i.e., the number of agents in whose feed the message was added, regardless of whether it was ultimately reviewed or not), its ‘exposure’ (i.e., the number of agents who reviewed the message), and its ‘engagement’ (i.e., the number of agents who reshared or liked the message). For each of these metrics, we further define across all algorithm–architecture combinations (i) its “breadth” (i.e., the proportion of messages with non-zero value of the metric), ( ii ) its “depth” (i.e., its overall value across all messages), and ( iii ) its “quality” (i.e., the mean content quality of messages with non-zero values in that metric). Ten independent simulation runs with different random seeds provide estimates of cross-run variability and allow us to assess the robustness of findings to stochastic variation in agent behavior. 

# Results 

We ran each simulation for 10,000 time steps (i.e. agent activations) across eight conditions de-fined by the factorial combination of architecture (Reddit, Facebook, Twitter, or TikTok) and algorithm (LIFO or Hot), replicated across 10 simulation runs with different random seeds. Each simulation run yielded approximately 4,464 messages per condition (range: 4,359–4,561), for a total of 357,088 messages across all conditions. Moses’ theory of generic architectures ranks architectures by flexibility – the extent to which they impose constraints on how the system behaves [8]. Applied to social media, it predicts that the effect of a recommendation algorithm on information spread and quality should be largest on the most architecturally flexible platforms and smallest on the most architecturally constrained ones (see Materials and Methods). We test this prediction by examining the contrast between the LIFO and Hot algorithm within each platform. We use hurdle models and combine both model components (see Materials and Methods) to estimate the mean exposures per message as the product of exposure breadth (the proportion of messages reviewed by at least one agent) and exposure depth (the mean number of agents who reviewed a message, among messages reviewed by at least one agent). A similar consideration can be done for message reach and engagement. These metrics capture different aspects of the total information flow across all messages and allow us to test the flexibility hy-pothesis of Moses’ theory. Figure 1 shows this ratio for both reach (Panel A) and exposure (Panel B). In both panels, the Hot/LIFO ratio is ordered from least to most flexible as predicted by Moses’ theory, though in opposite directions: the Hot algorithm reduces message reach the most on TikTok (Panel A), while it increases message exposure the most on TikTok (Panel B). In either cases, Reddit is unchanged. Figure 2(A) shows the breadth of exposure and engagement (broken down by reshares and likes) across our simulations, while Figure 2(B) shows the depth distributions for reach, exposure, and engagements (again broken down by reshares and likes) at the end of our simulation run for both Hot and LIFO algorithm. Panel A omits reach, since reach and exposure are identical at the binary level; however the two diverge in count (Panel B). In other words, viral messages reach the feeds of many agents but not all agents review them before displacement. In fact, across all combinations, the majority of messages is never seen by any agent nor receives any engagement 41× 0.48× 0.43× 0.01×         

> 1× 1.75× 1.95× 6.02×
> AReach BExposure
> 0.1× 1× 2× 1× 2× 5×
> Reddit Facebook Twitter TikTok
> Hot ÷ LIFO (log scale)

Figure 1: Hot ÷ LIFO ratio of mean number of agents reached or exposed per message, in log scale. The dashed line corresponds to no effect (1 × ratio). Platforms are ordered by Moses’ flexibility metric: Reddit (tree) < Facebook (layered) < Twitter (network) < TikTok (complete graph). Panel A: Reach; the Hot algorithm reduces the total number of agents reached per message monotoni-cally with architectural flexibility, from no effect on Reddit to a 99% reduction on TikTok. Panel B: Exposure; the Hot algorithm increases the total number of exposed agents each message in the same architectural order, from no effect on Reddit to a 6 × increase on TikTok. The mirror-image ordering across panels confirms that architectural flexibility determines the magnitude of the algorithm’s effect regardless of direction. (Figure 2(A)). In terms of reshares, we find that Reddit is the least affected by algorithm change where agent reshares follow similar distributions regardless of the choice of algorithm. Next, Facebook shows a greater variation highlighting the influence of friends, group and page subscriptions on platform flexibility. Similar to Facebook, Twitter shows a slightly higher change in agent reshares from changes in the algorithm since its architecture is more flexible. Lastly, TikTok shows the greatest variability and overall impact of the algorithm. Likes follow a qualitatively similar pattern to reshares. 

## Reddit: The Algorithm Has No Observable Effect 

On Reddit, changing from the LIFO algorithm to the Hot algorithm had no detectable effect on any outcome. Exposure breadth was identical under both algorithms (0.8% of messages received any exposure by at least one agent), as was resharing breadth (0.8%) and liking breadth (0.1%). Depth was similarly unaffected: under both LIFO and Hot, the per message geometric means for agents reached, agents exposed, and agents who reshared, or agents who liked were 2.19, 1.28, 1.09, and 1.10, respectively. All six hurdle model algorithm effects on Reddit were indistinguishable from zero (all p = 1.000), and all algorithm × Reddit interaction terms were similarly null. Exposure-weighted mean content quality was 0.364 for both algorithms. 5Exposure Reshares Likes        

> Reddit Facebook Twitter TikTok
> Reddit Facebook Twitter TikTok
> Reddit Facebook Twitter TikTok
> 0% 5% 10% 15%
> Algorithm LIFO Hot
> Reach and exposure are identical at the binary level.
> AProportion of messages engaged with by at least one agent
> Reach Exposure Reshares Likes
> Reddit Facebook Twitter TikTok
> Reddit Facebook Twitter TikTok
> Reddit Facebook Twitter TikTok
> Reddit Facebook Twitter TikTok
> 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5
> log(unique agents)
> BNumber of unique agents per message (log scale)

Figure 2: Panel A shows the breadth of exposure and engagement (broken down by engagement type); reach is not shown since it is identical to exposure. Panel B shows the depth of reach, exposure, and engagement (again broken down), in log scale. 

## Facebook: Modest Algorithm Effects 

On Facebook, switching from LIFO to Hot reduced exposure breadth from 8.8% to 5.0% (OR = 0.54, p < .001 ), resharing breadth from 8.7% to 4.9% (OR = 0.54, p < .001 ), and liking breadth from 5.0% to 2.7% (OR = 0.51, p = .001). For depth, Hot reduced mean agents reached per message from 683.4 to 573.6, and increased mean agents exposed, agents resharing, and agents liked, from 37.7 to 115.2, 2.08 to 4.02, and 11.15 to 29.72, respectively. In contrast, per message geometric means for agents reached and agents exposed declined from 11.6 to 7.46 (OR = 0.53, p < .001 )and 11.6 to 7.46 (OR = 0.64, p < .001 ), respectively, reflecting increased concentration of exposure among a smaller number of messages. The Hot algorithm modestly improved information quality (exposure-weighted mean content quality increased from 0.409 to 0.481). 

## Twitter: Modest Algorithm Effects 

On Twitter, switching from LIFO to hot reduced exposure breadth from 7.5% to 3.5% (OR = 0.44, 

p < .001 ), resharing breadth from 7.5% to 3.5% (OR = 0.44, p < .001 ), and liking breadth from 4.4% to 2.0% (OR = 0.44, p < .001 ). For depth, Hot reduced mean agents reached per message from 986.5 to 920.5, and increased mean agents exposed, agents resharing, and agents liked, from 43.0 to 180.2, 2.24 to 5.28, and 12.27 to 40.97, respectively. In contrast, per message geometric means for agents reached and agents exposed declined from 432.7 to 229.6 (OR = 0.53, p < .001 ) and 16.0 to 10.1 (OR = 0.63, p < .001 ), respectively, again reflecting increased concentration of exposure among a smaller number of messages. The Hot algorithm modestly improved information quality 6(exposure-weighted mean content quality increased from 0.423 to 0.482). Twitter produced greater depth than Facebook across all conditions (see Supplementary Ma-terials). 

## TikTok: The Algorithm Is Focal 

On TikTok, the Hot algorithm produced dramatic effects on all outcomes. Exposure breadth decreased from 16.9% under LIFO – the highest of any condition – to 0.2% under Hot – the lowest of any condition (OR = 0.01, p < .001 ). Resharing breadth also decreased (from 16.9% to 0.2%, OR = 0.01, p < .001 ) and liking breadth from 8.1% to 0.1% (OR = 0.02, p < .001 ). The fully-connected structure of TikTok ensured that messages, once reaching a feed, were reviewed by virtually all agents regardless of algorithm (OR = 0.05, p = 0.78 ) However, once received, all other measures of depth increased under Hot compared to LIFO: the geometric mean number of agents exposed, resharing, and liking each message increased from 10.2 to 4,563 (OR = 477.3, p < .001 ), 1.21 to 39.0 (OR = 35.7, p < .001 ), and 3.02 to 128.9 (OR = 54.1, p < .001 ), respectively. Information quality decreased correspondingly. Exposure-weighted mean content quality fell from 0.382 under LIFO to 0.032 under Hot – a 92% reduction. Mixed-effect models of content quality (see Materials and Methods) suggest that 91% of this collapse was a direct effect of the algorithm operating within TikTok’s unconstrained architecture, not an artifact of differential surfacing of content types ( b = −0.305 vs −0.336 after controlling for content composition, p <

.001 ). The quality of the locked-in content was not systematically low; rather, it was random. Across ten independent simulation runs with identical parameters, exposure-weighted content quality ranged from −0.243 to +0.439 , a range of 0.682, compared to a range of only 0.083 across seeds for TikTok/LIFO (see Figure 5). 

## Information Quality, Breadth, and Depth Across Conditions 

Figure 3 summarizes how information quality, breadth, and depth vary across all eight conditions. Under LIFO, all platforms produced positive exposure-weighted content quality (range: 0.364– 0.423), with Reddit showing the lowest breadth and depth and TikTok the highest breadth. The Hot algorithm had negligible effects on Reddit, modest positive effects on Facebook and Twitter quality, and larger negative effects on TikTok quality. In particular, the TikTok/Hot combination moves sharply left (quality collapse), downward (breadth collapse), and increases dramatically in size (depth explosion), reflecting winner-take-all lock-in. This interpretation is confirmed by Figure 4, that reveals that under TikTok/Hot, exposed messages were almost entirely restricted to those produced in the earliest simulation time steps, with larger exposure counts, confirming that lock-in selected on timing rather than quality. In contrast, Reddit shows sparse, uniformly small exposure counts regardless of algorithm. Finally, analysis of the individual random seeds used across simulation runs in Figure 5 shows that quality varied substantially across seeds only in the TikTok/Hot combination, whereas it was consistent across seeds under all other conditions. This confirms that the winner-take-all mechanism is specific to the combination of an unconstrained architecture and a popularity-based algorithm. 7100 300 1,000 3,000   

> 0.0 0.2 0.4
> Exposure−weighted mean information quality
> Number of messages exposed (log scale)
> Algorithm
> LIFO
> Hot
> Mean exposures (among exposed)
> 10
> 100
> 1000
> 5000
> Platform
> Reddit
> Facebook
> Twitter
> TikTok

Figure 3: Quality, breadth, and depth of information exposure by platform and algorithm. Each bubble represents one platform × algorithm condition. X axis: exposure-weighted mean con-tent quality (linear scale, depth). Y axis: number of messages receiving any exposure (log scale, breadth). Marker size is proportional to mean exposures per message among exposed messages (depth). Platform indicated by color; algorithm by marker shape (circle = LIFO, triangle = Hot). 

# Discussion 

Our findings demonstrate that platform architecture strongly determines how information flows on social media platforms. In contrast, recommendation algorithm effects appear to be condi-tioned on the architectural context in which they operate. This pattern is the empirical signature of the flexibility of generic architectures predicted by Moses’ theory [8]: more flexible architec-tures impose fewer constraints on how the algorithm shapes information flow. The mirror-image Moses ordering of the two ratios in Fig. 1 – reach declining most on the most flexible platform but exposure increasing most on the most flexible platform – confirms that architectural flexibility determines the magnitude of the algorithm’s effect on both reach and exposure simultaneously, but in opposite directions. The result is a massive concentration of exposure on a small subset of messages that are able to reach the feeds of any agent. On Reddit, the Hot algorithm had essentially no effect across all outcomes, confirming that the presence of subreddits, acting as collectors of messages, behave as a sort of ‘structural gate’ that suppresses the impact of the algorithm on individual user feeds. Although our model did not 8Reddit Facebook Twitter TikTok            

> LIFO  Hot
> 02,000 4,000 02,000 4,000 02,000 4,000 02,000 4,000
> −1 01
> −1 01
> Message ID (production order within seed)
> Information quality
> Exposures
> 1
> 10
> 100
> 1,000
> 5,000
> Algorithm
> LIFO
> Hot

Figure 4: Content quality and production order of exposed messages for all architectures under LIFO and Hot algorithms, combining data from multiple simulation runs together. Each circle represents one message receiving any exposure. The X axis is the message ID (i.e., its production order within each run). The Y axis the message quality. Circle size is proportional to the number of exposures received. Color: algorithm (blue = LIFO, orange = Hot). explicitly include moderator agents in these subreddits, in the real world the actions of human moderators are likely to strengthen this filtering effect. In contrast, on TikTok, the Hot algorithm had catastrophic effects on breadth, depth, and quality, confirming that TikTok’s complete graph, which imposes no structural constraints on information flow, gives the algorithm maximum freedom to determine what spreads and to whom. The differences between reach and exposure on TikTok under Hot illustrates the winner-take-all mechanism at play. The Hot algorithm did not cause viral messages to reach more agents. Rather, agents’ exposures were almost exclusively focused on the small number of messages that entered circulation. Winner-take-all lock-in on TikTok is therefore not a property of how widely content spreads through the network, but of how the Hot algorithm privileges a small number of messages for exposure. These messages were the ones produced in the earliest time steps of the simulation. The result is that early winners monopolize agent queues, accumulating enormous exposure counts while crowding out all subsequently produced content. As a result, the quality of this locked-in content is a function of the initial conditions of the system, and specifically, of the messages that happen to be produced before agent queues fill to capacity. Our results suggest that the dynamics of highly flexible systems like TikTok may exhibit 9LIFO Hot  

> Reddit  Facebook  Twitter  TikTok
> −0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 −0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50
> 12345678910
> 12345678910
> 12345678910
> 12345678910

Mean information quality of agent exposures 

> Seed rank (lowest to highest)

Mean quality 

> −0.50 −0.25 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75

Figure 5: Seed-level mean information quality of agent exposures by platform × algorithm condi-tion. Each point is one simulation seed, ranked from lowest (1) to highest (10) exposure-weighted mean quality within each condition. Horizontal segments connect each seed’s mean quality to zero. The color of the marker is mapped to quality. 10 behaviors resembling a tipping point. Even when a majority of the content is high quality, a relatively small amount of viral, low quality information can dominate users’ queues relatively quickly if it is introduced early on. The TikTok/Hot condition therefore represents a qualitatively different regime from all other conditions. Overall, these findings suggest a possible reframing of the TikTok misinformation problem: the issue is not that TikTok’s algorithm systematically selects low-quality content, but that it amplifies whatever content happens to achieve early traction regardless of quality – a structural lottery whose outcomes are unpredictable by design, yet are a function of both content quality and user demand, which may prime the system for an information cascade of low (or high) qual-ity content. This is consistent with the empirical finding that content moderation interventions on architecturally flexible platforms tend to be ineffective or counterproductive [10, 11]: if the information environment is determined by early lock-in rather than by sustained quality-based selection, then post-hoc removal of low-quality content will simply be replaced by whichever content happens to fill the resulting vacancy. These results may also explain recent counterintu-itive empirical findings [6] that social media posts about COVID-19 contained proportionally less misinformation than misinformation about other topics and in prior years, despite a widespread perception that misinformation was ubiquitous. Our observation that the Hot algorithm modestly improves information quality on Facebook and Twitter is also counterintuitive in light of the broader literature associating engagement-based ranking with misinformation amplification [13, 30]. We interpret this as a consequence of intermediate architectural flexibility: on structured platforms, content must pass through quality-sensitive resharing chains before accumulating engagement. Agents on these platforms only re-share content that exceeds their quality preference threshold, so the Hot algorithm amplifies con-tent that has already been filtered for quality. This interpretation predicts that the positive quality effect of Hot should diminish or reverse as platform architecture becomes less constrained, which is exactly the pattern observed on TikTok. This finding is consistent with Wang et al. [31], who find that algorithmic timelines on Twitter surface more reliable content than chronological feeds, and with Baumann et al. [2], who identify conditions under which engagement optimization and content quality are compatible rather than opposed. In addition, both Moses’ theory and prior empirical findings [10, 11] predict that Twitter’s network architecture should be more flexible than Facebook’s layered hierarchy, producing larger algorithm effects [8]. Our results are directionally consistent with this prediction: Twitter showed greater depth than Facebook under both algorithms across all three outcomes, and the breadth reduction under Hot was slightly larger on Twitter (56% relative decline) than Facebook (43%). However, the difference between the two platforms was modest, and no clear ordering emerged for the algorithm contrast itself. The failure to observe a clearer separation between Facebook and Twitter is likely a consequence of simulation scale rather than a theoretical failure. Moses’ flexibility metric predicts that the difference between a layered hierarchy and a network archi-tecture grows with the number of nodes – their orders of growth are within the same asymptotic class for small systems [8]. With a fixed agent population that uses similar implementations of Facebook and Twitter user networks (see Materials and Methods) our simulations may not have been large enough to produce the separation that the theory predicts at scale. Future work with larger simulations should be able to resolve this ordering empirically. These findings have direct implications for the reform proposals discussed in the Introduc-tion [24]. Given that our findings show whether algorithm choice has any effect at all is depen-11 dent on the choice of platform architecture, platform governance efforts that focus exclusively on algorithm choice, such as Bluesky’s algorithm marketplace [18] or proposals for algorithm auditing [26] may be insufficient on architecturally unconstrained platforms and unnecessary on architecturally constrained ones. On Reddit-like architectures, algorithm choice may not mat-ter; on TikTok-like architectures, algorithm choice fully determines whether the lock-in dynamic dominates. The actionable implication is that architectural constraints may be more powerful levers for information quality governance than algorithmic interventions, and should be the pri-mary target of attempts to govern social media platforms. Several limitations of this study warrant acknowledgment. First, our simulations model a simplified version of each platform architecture, and we hold agent population, content qual-ity distributions, and quality preferences constant across conditions. Second, we compare only two algorithms, LIFO and Hot, covering only part of the algorithm design space. Real platforms use more complex ranking functions that combine recency, engagement, personalization, and other signals; the effects of these hybrid algorithms on architecturally constrained versus uncon-strained platforms remain to be studied. Third, the agent quality preference parameter is drawn from a uniform distribution and held fixed over the course of the simulation; real users may up-date their preferences dynamically in response to the information environment they encounter, a feedback process not captured here. Fourth, the operationalization of depth for the Moses ordering comparison can yield differ-ent ordinal rankings across conditions depending on whether arithmetic or geometric means are used. The arithmetic mean is sensitive to extreme values – a small number of messages receiving very large engagement counts pulls the mean upward substantially – while the geometric mean, which corresponds directly to the log-normal model coefficients, reflects the typical message rather than the average message and is therefore more robust to outliers. In the Supplementary Information, we report full orderings for both means, and although the ordering holds for the arithmetic mean, it does not always hold for the geometric mean. We do not view this as a failure of the Moses ordering prediction, but rather as a feature of it: the greater concentration of en-gagement on a small number of messages is itself a consequence of architectural flexibility, which removes structural constraints that would otherwise distribute engagement more evenly across messages. The arithmetic mean captures this concentration effect directly, while the geometric mean averages it away. Future work should develop more formal tests of the Moses ordering that account for the full shape of the depth distribution rather than relying on a single summary statistic. Finally, our model does not incorporate platform-wide content moderation policies or other similar platform-level interventions [1]. Findings on the efficacy of these interventions is mixed. Differences in architecture may explain these divergent findings. [10, 11, 14, 22]. Similarly, we do not explicitly model the role of volunteer moderators or other middle-level layers of governance distinct from platform ones [17]. Such examinations, and analysis of other platforms governance arrangements [12, 17] are left to future work. In conclusion, our results show that the effect of the choice of algorithm on information flow strongly depends on the choice of architecture. On highly-constrained platforms such as Reddit, the recommendation algorithm has no effect at all. On a fully connected platform like TikTok, the algorithm is focal because the architecture imposes no constraints on where information can go. This suggests that architecture imposes a fundamental constraint on what algorithmic gov-ernance can achieve, and that efforts to improve the quality of online information environments 12 Table 1: Summary of the architectures in our model.                                            

> Name Topology Nodes Edges Example platforms
> Network Users (circles ●)user ↔user Twitter/X, Weibo, Tum-blr, Threads, Substack Notes, Bluesky Team / Complete Users (circles ●)user ↔user TikTok, Instagram Reels, YouTube Shorts Tree Users (circles ●), groups (squares ■)user ↔community Reddit, Usenet, Nextdoor, Web Fo-rums Layered Users (circles ●), groups (squares ■), pages (diamonds ◆)user ↔group, user
> ↔page, user ↔
> user, page ↔group, page ↔page Facebook, VKontakte

that focus exclusively on algorithms while leaving architecture unexamined may target the lever with the least purchase while leaving the largest determinant of quality untouched. 

# Materials and Methods 

## Simulation Design 

We construct a simulation framework that captures key features of multiple platform architec-tures and algorithms, and that features a parsimonious set of agent-level characteristics. In par-ticular, we consider four prototypical architectures as stand-ins for four major classes of social media platforms (see Table 1): Network (inspired by flat microblogging platforms like Twitter/X), Team or Complete (for fully algorithmic platforms like TikTok), Tree (for community aggregator platforms like Reddit), and Layered (for social networks with different classes of nodes possess-ing different message transmission affordances, such as Facebook’s users, groups, and pages). This choice of architectures deliberately captures the full range of the flexibility spectrum [7], while allowing us to study their interaction with different types of algorithms in common use by social media companies. Of course our model is necessarily a simplified description of the real-world counterparts of these architectures, which are constantly evolving and competing with each other by adopting common features and designs. Our goal is not to attain a realistic de-scription of these systems, but rather to allow for controlled comparisons across scenarios while capturing key features of these real-world systems. 13 Platform Architectures 

We first describe the four architectures from the most to the least flexible according to Moses’ theory. 

Team or Complete (e.g. TikTok). TikTok, as well as specific features of other platforms like Insta-gram Reels or YouTube Shorts, operates as a “commons”[34] – i.e., a fully-connected user “team” or “complete” architecture, where the inventory from which recommendations are drawn encom-passes the content created by any users on the platform (i.e., out-of-network recommendations), and not just the immediate neighbors of a user (in-network recommendations). This means that content propagation is not limited by prior relationships but is determined dynamically by en-gagement patterns. According to Moses’ theory, a “team” should be the most flexible and least controllable of the architectures included in this study.[8] 

Network (e.g. Twitter/X). A “network” is a flat social network architecture organized through a follower model, as first popularized by microblogging platform Twitter (now X), Weibo, and Tum-blr, and more recently by Threads, Substack Notes, and Bluesky. Users follow other users to see their content in an ordered timeline. Unlike the “tree” architecture (exemplified by Reddit, see below), there are no hard community boundaries, and unlike the “layered” architecture (exem-plified by Facebook, see below), there is only one entity type. All users exist in a public, shared space, and content can traverse widely via resharing or retweeting. According to Moses’ theory, a “network” is expected to be flexible but not very controllable compared to most of the platforms in this study, with the notable exception of the “team”.[8] 

Layered (e.g. Facebook). Mature social networking services like Facebook or VKontakte typically exhibit a multi-layered hierarchical architecture.[10] The primary layers include users, where individual accounts can produce, share, and engage with content. Next is the layer for groups which are interest-based collectives where membership gates access and visibility, but all mem-bers can post and share. Lastly, and unlike the “tree”, there is an additional layer for pages (e.g., for brands or influencers) that broadcast to large audiences. Links in this system are therefore heterogeneous, denoting relationships such as friendship, group memberships, and page sub-scriptions. According to Moses’ theory, the “layered” architecture should be moderately flexible and moderately controllable compared to the other architectures considered in this study.[8] 

Tree (e.g. Reddit). Platforms organized into topically bounded communities (groups, channels, etc.) can be thought as roughly resembling a tree-like structure (e.g. Nextdoor, where a house can only be part of one neighborhood) or, more commonly, a bipartite structure (e.g. Reddit, Usenet, or most web forums). According to Moses’ theory, a “tree” is the least flexible of the architectures considered in this study. Although platforms such as Reddit allow users to participate across groups (therefore violating a strict tree structure) content is still localized within groups by design. 

Recommendation Algorithms 

Next, we consider two major ranking algorithms in our simulations, corresponding to widely used ranking methods: reverse chronological, and popularity-based ranking. 

LIFO (Last-In, First-Out). The LIFO algorithm prioritizes the most recently received message. This mechanism emphasizes recency and is often used in real-time communication platforms (e.g., messaging apps, live updates, and reverse chronological feeds). In the context of content feeds, LIFO is expected to lead to short-term attention dominance, where newer messages quickly 14 displace older ones regardless of quality or relevance. 

Hot. The “Hot” algorithm ranks and selects the message with the highest number of reshares, approximating a dynamic popularity score, making popular messages dominate the feed. In the context of content feeds, Hot is expected to lead to self-reinforcement or rich-get-richer pat-terns, where messages that accrue early popularity displace news ones regardless of quality or relevance. 

## Model Mechanics 

Our model describes a generic social media platform as a system where messages are passed around different types of entities (users, groups, and pages). We refer to them as agents , each belonging to a particular layer , which defines the patterns of connectivity with the rest of the system (see Table 1). Common to all architectures is a layer of users , who are capable of producing new messages and resharing messages they receive. Each user is equipped with two finite-size queues: an input queue represents their news feed, and an output queue represents their user profile, which collects all the messages posted or reshared by the user. When a user posts a message into their output queue, it is automatically pushed into the input queues of ( i) all others users (“team”), ( ii ) users who either follow (“network”) or are friends (“layered”) with the user, or ( iii ) in the queues of the groups the user is member of (“tree” and “layered”). In our model users behave following a model of human decision making inspired by Fuzzy-Trace Theory when deciding which messages to reshare or like. [9] For full detail on characteristics of users and messages, see Supplementary Information. In addition to users, our model features two other types of agents: groups and pages (see Table 1). Their presence depends on the architecture: the “network” and the “team” only feature users; the ‘tree’ and “layered” architectures both feature groups; and the “layered” architecture is the only one that features pages. In both the “tree” and “layered” architectures users are members of multiple groups. These are modeled as pure message repositories, each of which are associated with a single queue that acts simultaneously as both the input and output queue. When a user activates to perform an action (see below), they pull all messages from the queues of the groups they are member of into their own input queue (which, in the “layered” architecture may already contain messages pushed from other users). If a user decides to post into a group, their message is added to that same group’s queue. Pages, on the other hand, behave as a hybrid between a group and a user. Like a user, they have both an input and output queue. As on Facebook, pages can follow other pages. When a page posts a message (either by creating a new message or by resharing a message from another page) into their output queue, it is automatically copied into the input queue of all pages that follow it. Like groups, users pull from the output queues of pages they follow when they activate to read their own feed. Finally, as on Facebook, pages can also be “admins” of groups. Thus, when a message is posted into the output queue of a page, it is automatically copied into the queues of all the groups it is admin of. For details about the sampling procedure to obtain simulations, see Supplementary Informa-tion. 15 Figure 6: Network structures for TikTok (left-most), Twitter, Facebook and Reddit (right-most) 

## Simulation 

We ran our simulations with 10,000 users over 10,000 time steps replicated over 10 seed values. To ensure that the parameters we use are representative, we calibrated them against empirical findings. Specifically, the post probability is set to 0.45, reflecting observed activity rates in Twitter diffusion networks [33]. The reshare probability is set to 0.25, consistent with previously reported reshare behaviors [28]. The queue size , representing an agent’s screen or attention span, was set to 10, aligning with the previously reported default values [28]. To create the network, we sampled from an actual Twitter follower network, consisting of approximately 41.65 million users and 14.7 billion edges [19]. Specifically, to get a representative sample from the original network, we used random-walk sampling with restarts [20]. For com-parison purposes, we sampled from the same network for Facebook’s user–user and page–page networks (see Fig. 6). As of the writing of this paper, Facebook has billions of daily active users, tens of millions of active groups, and hundreds of millions of pages. To maintain the rough proportions of users between users, groups, and pages, we ran our simulations for Facebook with 9,000 users, 1,000 pages and 100 groups. (Groups do not generate content, and therefore do not count towards the 10,000 agent limit.) Similarly, Reddit currently has hundreds of thousands of active subreddits and hundreds of millions of daily users. For consistency with Facebook we pick 100 subreddits for our model. We also limit the maximum number of groups, pages, and subreddits that a user can join at 10 of each type. We modeled TikTok’s network as a fully connected graph, where each user is connected to every other user, resulting in (n × (n − 1)) edges for a network of n users. In summary, our network had 10,000 users with 99,990,000 edges for TikTok, 10,000 users with 2,281,390 edges for Twitter, 9,000 users, 1,000 pages and 100 groups with 1,839,636 edges for Facebook, and 10,000 users with 100 groups with 2,000 edges for Reddit. Our setup for running the simulations is an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6338 CPU @ 2.00GHz with 251GB RAM. 

## Statistical Analysis 

We fitted six hurdle models to characterize the effects of platform architecture and recommenda-tion algorithm on engagement, one binary (which we refer to as ‘breadth’) and one count model (‘depth’) for each of three outcomes: reach (whether a message was included in the feed of a user, regardless of exposure), exposure (whether a message was seen by an agent and how many agents it reached), resharing (whether any agent reshared a message and how many times it was reshared), and liking (whether any agent liked a message and how many likes it received). Bi-nary outcomes were modeled using mixed-effects logistic regression (binomial family, logit link). 16 Count outcomes were modeled using log-normal regression (Gaussian family, identity link on log-transformed counts) restricted to messages with at least one engagement event, consistent with the hurdle model framework. All models included platform architecture (Reddit, Facebook, Twitter, TikTok; reference: Reddit), recommendation algorithm (LIFO, Hot; reference: LIFO), their interaction, and content quality dimensions (illuminating, motivating) as fixed effects, with a random intercept for simulation seed to account for between-run variability. Model fit for count models was assessed using DHARMa nonparametric dispersion tests; all six models showed ex-cellent fit (dispersion ≈ 1.000, all p > .93 ). All models were fitted in R using glmmTMB version 1.1.9. To establish whether platform architecture and algorithm causally affect the quality of content agents encounter within our model, we fitted two encounter-level Gaussian mixed-effects models predicting message quality at the agent-message level, using all agent-message encounters in the exposures. The first model (total effect) included platform architecture, recommendation algo-rithm, their interaction, and agent quality preference as fixed effects, with random intercepts for message nested within seed to account for the non-independence of multiple agents encountering the same message. The second model additionally included content composition covariates (il-luminating & motivating) to decompose the direct and composition-mediated effects of platform and algorithm on encountered content quality. 

Artificial Intelligence 

The authors used Claude Sonnet 4.6 (Anthropic, San Francisco, CA) to assist with statistical anal-ysis, code development, figure design, and manuscript preparation. All scientific content, inter-pretations, and conclusions are the responsibility of the authors. 

Acknowledgments. This material is based on work supported in part by the Institute for Trustworthy AI in Law and Society (TRAILS), which is supported by National Institute of Stan-dards and Technology and the National Science Foundation under Award No. 2229885. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or the National Institute of Standards and Technology. DAB and JS acknowledge support from the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation via the GW Institute for Data, Democracy, and Politics. GLC acknowledges support from the NSF under CAREER grant no. 2239194 and from the University of Maryland Social Data Science Center. The authors would like to thank Haneen Al-Rashid for feedback and insightful discussions and Dr. Howie Huang for access to computational resources. 

# References 

[1] J. B. Bak-Coleman, I. Kennedy, M. Wack, A. Beers, J. S. Schafer, E. S. Spiro, K. Starbird, and J. D. West. Combining interventions to reduce the spread of viral misinformation. Nature Human Behaviour , 6(10):1372–1380, 2022. [2] F. Baumann, D. Halpern, A. D. Procaccia, I. Rahwan, I. Shapira, and M. Wüthrich. Optimal engagement-diversity tradeoffs in social media. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024 , pages 288–299, 2024. 17 [3] W. J. Brady, J. C. Jackson, B. Lindström, and M. J. Crockett. Algorithm-mediated social learning in online social networks. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 27(10):947–960, Oct. 2023. [4] D. A. Broniatowski, K. M. Hilyard, and M. Dredze. Effective vaccine communication during the disneyland measles outbreak. Vaccine , 34(28):3225–3228, 2016. [5] D. A. Broniatowski, P. Hosseini, E. V. Porter, and T. J. Wood. The role of mental repre-sentation in sharing misinformation online. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied ,30(4):511–538, Dec. 2024. [6] D. A. Broniatowski, D. Kerchner, F. Farooq, X. Huang, A. M. Jamison, M. Dredze, S. C. Quinn, and J. W. Ayers. Twitter and facebook posts about covid-19 are less likely to spread misin-formation compared to other health topics. PLOS ONE , 17(1):e0261768, 2022. [7] D. A. Broniatowski and J. Moses. Flexibility, complexity, and controllability in large scale systems, 2014. [8] D. A. Broniatowski and J. Moses. Measuring flexibility, descriptive complexity, and rework potential in generic system architectures. Systems Engineering , 19(3):207–221, 2016. [9] D. A. Broniatowski and V. F. Reyna. To illuminate and motivate: a fuzzy-trace model of the spread of information online. Computational and Mathematical Organization Theory ,26(4):431–464, Aug. 2019. [10] D. A. Broniatowski, J. R. Simons, J. Gu, A. M. Jamison, and L. C. Abroms. The efficacy of facebook’s vaccine misinformation policies and architecture during the covid-19 pandemic. 

Science Advances , 9(37):eadh2132, 2023. [11] D. A. Broniatowski, W. Zhong, J. R. Simons, A. M. Jamison, M. Dredze, and L. C. Abroms. Explaining twitter’s inability to effectively moderate content during the covid-19 pandemic. 

Scientific Reports , 15(1), oct 2025. [12] Y. T. Cao, L.-F. Domingo, S. Gilbert, M. L. Mazurek, K. Shilton, and H. Daumé Iii. Toxi-city detection is NOT all you need: Measuring the gaps to supporting volunteer content moderators through a user-centric method. In Y. Al-Onaizan, M. Bansal, and Y.-N. Chen, editors, Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing , pages 3567–3587, Miami, Florida, USA, Nov. 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. [13] G. L. Ciampaglia, A. Nematzadeh, F. Menczer, and A. Flammini. How algorithmic popularity bias hinders or promotes quality. Scientific reports , 8(1):15951, 2018. [14] L. Cima, B. Tessa, S. Cresci, A. Trujillo, and M. Avvenuti. Investigating the heterogenous effects of a massive content moderation intervention via difference-in-differences, 2025. [15] D. Eckles. Algorithmic transparency and assessing effects of algorithmic ranking. Technical report, SocArXiV, apr 2022. 18 [16] F. Huszár, S. I. Ktena, C. O’Brien, L. Belli, A. Schlaikjer, and M. Hardt. Algorithmic amplification of politics on Twitter. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,119(1):e2025334119, Jan. 2022. [17] S. Jhaver, S. Frey, and A. X. Zhang. Decentralizing Platform Power: A Design Space of Multi-Level Governance in Online Social Platforms. Social Media + Society ,9(4):20563051231207857, Oct. 2023. [18] M. Kleppmann, P. Frazee, J. Gold, J. Graber, D. Holmgren, D. Ivy, J. Johnson, B. Newbold, and J. Volpert. Bluesky and the at protocol: Usable decentralized social media. In Proceedings of the ACM Conext-2024 Workshop on the Decentralization of the Internet , DIN ’24, page 1–7, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. [19] J. Leskovec. Twitter follower network. https://snap.stanford.edu/data/twitter-2010.html, 2010. [20] J. Leskovec and C. Faloutsos. Sampling from large graphs. In Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD ’06, page 631–636, New York, NY, USA, 2006. Association for Computing Machinery. [21] M. Li, J. Suk, Y. Zhang, J. C. Pevehouse, Y. Sun, H. Kwon, R. Lian, R. Wang, X. Dong, and D. V. Shah. Platform affordances, discursive opportunities, and social media activism: A cross-platform analysis of #MeToo on twitter, facebook, and reddit, 2017–2020. New Media & Society , 28(1):119–147, Oct. 2024. [22] S. D. McCabe, D. Ferrari, J. Green, D. M. J. Lazer, and K. M. Esterling. Post-january 6th deplatforming reduced the reach of misinformation on twitter. Nature , 630(8015):132–140, 2024. [23] S. Milli, M. Carroll, Y. Wang, S. Pandey, S. Zhao, and A. D. Dragan. Engagement, user satis-faction, and the amplification of divisive content on social media. PNAS Nexus , 4(3):pgaf062, 03 2025. [24] A. Moehring, A. Cooper, A. Narayanan, A. Ovadya, E. Redmiles, J. Allen, J. Stray, J. Kamin, L. Sigerson, L. Thorburn, M. Motyl, M. Eslami, N. F. Johnson, N. Lubin, R. Iyer, and Z. Arnao. Better feeds: Algorithms that put people first. resreport, Knight–Georgetown Institute, Mar. 2025. [25] A. Orben and J. N. Matias. Fixing the science of digital technology harms. Science ,388(6743):152–155, 2025. [26] A. Ovadya and L. Thorburn. Bridging systems: Open problems for countering destructive divisiveness across ranking, recommenders, and governance. Technical report, CoRR, jan 2023. arXiv:2301.09976 [cs]. [27] T. Piccardi, M. Saveski, C. Jia, J. Hancock, J. L. Tsai, and M. S. Bernstein. Reranking par-tisan animosity in algorithmic social media feeds alters affective polarization. Science ,390(6776):eadu5584, Nov. 2025. arXiv:2411.14652 [cs]. 19 [28] K. Sasahara, W. Chen, H. Peng, G. L. Ciampaglia, A. Flammini, and F. Menczer. Social influ-ence and unfollowing accelerate the emergence of echo chambers. Journal of Computational Social Science , 4(1):381–402, 2021. [29] P. E. Smaldino, A. Russell, M. R. Zefferman, J. Donath, J. G. Foster, D. Guilbeault, M. Hilbert, E. A. Hobson, K. Lerman, H. Miton, et al. Information architectures: a framework for un-derstanding socio-technical systems. npj Complexity , 2(1):13, 2025. [30] S. van der Linden. How influencers and algorithms mobilize propaganda—and distort reality. 

Nature , 633(8029), 2024. [31] S. Wang, S. Huang, A. Zhou, and D. Metaxa. Lower quantity, higher quality: Auditing news content and user perceptions on twitter/x algorithmic versus chronological timelines. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction , 8(CSCW2):1–25, 2024. [32] Z. Wei and D. A. Broniatowski. Characterizing system architectures using network data. 

Procedia Computer Science , 153:301–308, 2019. [33] L. Weng, A. Flammini, A. Vespignani, and F. Menczer. Competition among memes in a world with limited attention. Scientific reports , 2(1):335, 2012. [34] A. X. Zhang, M. S. Bernstein, D. R. Karger, and M. S. Ackerman. Form-from: A design space of social media systems. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction ,8(CSCW1):1–47, 2024. 20 Supplementary Information A User characteristics 

A user/page a ∈ A is an agent described by the following traits: 

• Quality preference ϕa ∈ [−1, 1]: A scalar reflecting the agent’s preference for quality content. This value is sampled from a uniform distribution. 

• The reward sensitivity ρa ∈ [0, 1] and meaning seeking μa ∈ [0, 1], which reflect the motivation to either seek engagement (reward sensitivity) and interpretive depth (meaning seeking) when scrolling through their feed. Both of these two traits are independently drawn from triangular distributions. These two traits are used to determine the likelihood to share content, which is described next. 

• The probability to re-share messages p(s) 

> a

, which is defined as the vector norm p(s) 

> a

=

∥σa∥2 = √(1 − ρa)2 + (1 − μa)2.

• Let p(l) 

> a,m

be the probability that user a ∈ A likes a message m ∈ M, which is defined as the weighted average p(l) 

> a,m

= (1 − ϕa)km + ϕaβm, where km and βm are the message ‘clickbaitness’ and informativeness, respectively, which are defined below. 

# B Message Characteristics 

A messages m ∈ M is described by the following traits: 1. Motivational valence (i.e., degree of appeal or clickbait content) km ∈ [0, 1], indicating how attention-grabbing the message is; 2. Illuminating power βm ∈ [0, 1], indicating how meaningful or insightful the message is; 3. Informativeness or quality αm ∈ [−1, 1], where a value of −1 indicates a misleading mes-sage, 0 neutral, and 1 and informative and factual message. These quantities are sampled for each message. Both km and βm are sampled from the same triangular distribution to model skewed preferences, such as most messages being moderately engaging but not highly insightful. The informativeness αm is instead sampled uniformly at random and is used as the measure of content quality in the main manuscript. Finally, the pair 

(km, β m) is used to calculate the message magnitude used in the simulation loop. This is defined as √k2 

> m

+ β2

> m

, providing a combined measure of the message’s overall strength. 

# C Model simulation 

To simulate the model, we implement a message-passing simulator over a graph G whose topol-ogy depends on the particular architecture being simulated. Nodes refer to the various types of 21 agents described in the main text for each architecture, and edges are connections among them. We describe the sampling algorithm with pseudocode given in Algorithm 1. At each time step, a random agent a ∈ A which could be either a user or page (if present in the architecture), is activated. If groups or subreddits are present, the agent pulls all messages from the groups/subreddits that is part of. Then, the agent may produce a new message with proba-bility ppost , or attempt to reshare with probability preshare . For reshares, candidate messages are drawn from the agent’s input queue. They are first filtered by their credibility (i.e., informative-ness above the agent’s quality preference) and share tendency (minimum message magnitude). If any messages meet these criteria, one of them is chosen at random and forwarded. The simulator records all message-level events (creation, resharing, etc.) to enable analysis of message diffusion under varying algorithmic and architectural conditions, as described in the main text. 22 Algorithm 1 Message Passing Simulator 

Inputs: 

A = {a1, . . . a N }: set of posting/resharing agents (users or pages) 

S = {s1, . . . s M }: set of non-posting agents (groups or subreddits) 

G = (V, E ): where V def 

= A ˙∪ S Graph of agents (nodes) and connections (edges) Let N ∶ V → 2V denote the neighbors of an agent Let L ∶ M → N denote the number of likes of each message 

T > 0: Number of simulation steps 

ppost : Probability an agent produces a message 

pshare : Probability an agent attempts to reshare a message 1: M ← ∅

2: for t = 1, . . . , T : do 

3: a def 

= (ϕa, ρ a, μ a) ← random choice from A

4: /* Pull messages from any group or subreddits, if any */ 

5: if N (a) ∩ S ≠ ∅ then 

6: Let Ng (a) def 

= N (a) ∩ S

7: for k = 1, . . . , ∣Ng (a)∣ do 

8: Qin  

> a

← Qin  

> a

∪ Qgk where gk ∈ Ng (a)

9: end for 

10: end if 

11: m ← None 

12: if a is a producer ∧ random () < ppost then 

13: m ← (km, β m, α m)

14: M ← M ∪ {m}

15: Let L(m) def 

= 0

16: else if a is a resharer ∧ random () < pshare then 

17: /* Filter input queue for candidate messages */ 

18: Mcand ← {m ∈ Qin  

> a

∣ αm > ϕa ∧ √k2 

> m

+ β2 

> m

≥ p(s) 

> a

}

19: if Mcand ≠ ∅ then 

20: m ← random choice from Mcand 

21: Qin  

> a

← Qin  

> a

\ { m}

22: end if 

23: end if 

24: if m ≠ None then 

25: /* Push message to all neighbors of a who are users, if any */ 

26: Let Nu(a) def 

= N (a) ∩ A ∧ aj is a user 27: if Nu(a) ≠ ∅ then 

28: for aj ∈ Nu(a) do 

29: Qin  

> aj

← Qin  

> aj

∪ {m}

30: end for 

31: end if 

32: /* Push message to a random group/subreddits of a, if any */ 

33: if N (a) ∩ S ≠ ∅ then 

34: sj ← random choice from N (a) ∩ S

35: Qin  

> sj

← Qin  

> sj

∪ {m}

36: end if 

37: end if 

38: /* Like the message with highest like probability in the feed */ 

39: Let N = ∣Qin  

> a

∣ and La

> def

= (m1, . . . , m N ), with p(l) 

> a,m 1

≥ p(l) 

> a,m 2

≥ . . . ≥ p(l)

> a,m N

40: L(m1) ← L(m1) + 1

41: end for 

23 D Supplementary Results 

## D.1 Dataset Overview 

We report the details of the dataset in Table 2. In our simulations, seeds are independent initial-izations. We use two algorithms (namely): chronological (LIFO) and engagement-ranked (Hot) feed orderings. Table 2: Dataset Overview 

Characteristic Value 

Total observations (message-level) 357,088 Seeds 10 Algorithm conditions 2 (LIFO, Hot) Platforms 4 (Reddit, Facebook, TikTok, Twitter) 

## D.2 Zero-Inflation 

We check for zero inflation in our dataset. Table 3 highlights that reshares and likes are heavily zero-inflated in the dataset. 94.6% and 97.2% of messages received no reshares or likes respec-tively. Reach (i.e., message ending up in user’s queue without explicit viewing required) shows comparable zero-inflation (94.5% zeros), as did the exposure, i.e., messages that were actually viewed by user’s prior to resharing or liking. Table 3: Zero-Inflation of Out-come and Exposure Variables 

Variable N (total) % Zero 

Reshares 357,088 94.6 Likes 357,088 97.2 Reach 357,088 94.5 Exposure 357,088 94.5 

## D.3 Construct validity 

We validate key constructs within our data by checking for: a) reshares without prior exposure, b) distinctness of exposure from agent’s queues, and c) likes without prior exposure. Table 4 highlights that no messages were reshared without reach (0 cases with reshares > 0 and reach = 0), consistent with the constraint that sharing requires viewing. Next, 144 messages had exposures >

0 but were not reshared which highlights that the exposure is a genuinely distinct measure rather than a deterministic function of resharing. Lastly, no messages had more likes than exposures (0 cases). 24 Table 4: Construct Validity Test 

Check Count 

Reshares > 0 & Reach = 0 0Exposure > 0 & Reshares = 0 144 Likes > Exposure 0   

> Note. Reach = number of agents who had message in their queue. Exposures = Ex-posure (agents who opened the message for deliberate review). The 144 messages with exposure but no reshares confirm that these two measures are distinct.

## D.4 Reach and Exposure 

Table 5 and 6 highlight that reach values vary substantially across platforms and exposure is considerably smaller in magnitude as exposure captures deliberate message viewing rather than appearing in agent queues. Table 5: Distribution of Reach by Platform, Conditional on Exposure > 0.

Platform Median 95th Percentile Maximum 

Reddit 2 4 7Facebook 266 2,420 5,875 Twitter 663 2,907 6,185 TikTok 9,999 9,999 9,999     

> Note. The statistics are computed on the subset of mes-sages with reach >0.

## D.5 Message Reach 

Table 7 shows the proportion of messages receiving any reach (whether a message entered any agent’s queue, independent of active review). 

## D.6 Selection into Exposure 

We estimate the probability that a message receives any exposure using logistic regression. The exposure is determined by messages that were explicitly viewed by agents while they pick one for resharing or liking from their queue. We set the outcome variable as binary, indicating whether a message is viewed at least once. Overall, this model captures whether content is surfaced to users at all. Table 8 shows that the probability of receiving any exposure is low at baseline (intercept at -7.31), reflecting that a small amount of messages receive exposure. We observe that the plat-25 Table 6: Distribution of Exposure by Platform, Condi-tional on Exposure > 0

Platform Median 95th Percentile Maximum 

Reddit 1 3 5Facebook 9 188 3,031 Twitter 14 219 3,401 TikTok 13 27 6,378 

Note. Statistics computed on the subset of messages with  

> exposures

> 0.. 

Table 7: Proportion of Messages Receiving Any Reach and Uncondi-tional Mean Reach Per Message, by Platform and Algorithm Condi-tion 

Platform Algorithm % Any Reach Unconditional Mean 

Reddit LIFO 0.8 0.02 Reddit Hot 0.8 0.02 Facebook LIFO 8.8 60.0 Facebook Hot 5.0 28.8 Twitter LIFO 7.5 74.2 Twitter Hot 3.5 32.1 TikTok LIFO 16.9 1686.0 TikTok Hot 0.2 22.9   

> Notes: Unconditional mean = proportion receiving any reach ×mean reach among exposed messages. Captures total structural information flow per message across all messages including those receiving no exposure.

Table 8: Logistic regression estimates of the probability that a message receives any exposure (at least one view) Term Estimate Std. Error z-value p-value Intercept −7.312 *** 0.062 −117 .38 <0.001 Hot algorithm −0.000 0.074 0.00 1.000 Facebook 2.472 *** 0.055 44.97 <0.001 TikTok 3.258 *** 0.054 60.48 <0.001 Twitter 2.303 *** 0.055 41.62 <0.001 Illuminating 2.311 *** 0.039 58.96 <0.001 Motivating 2.327 *** 0.039 59.26 <0.001 Hot × Facebook −0.619 *** 0.079 −7.84 <0.001 Hot × TikTok −4.559 *** 0.124 −36 .76 <0.001 Hot × Twitter −0.831 *** 0.080 −10 .34 <0.001          

> Notes: Reference category is Reddit platform with LIFO algorithm. Significance levels: * p<0.05 , ** p<0.01 , *** p<0.001 .

26 form effects are large and positive, indicating that Facebook, TikTok, and Twitter increase expo-sure likelihood relative to Reddit. Additionally, content features (illuminating, motivating) also strongly increase exposure. The hot algorithm has no main effect for Reddit, highlighting that the algorithm does not effect exposure on Reddit. However, we observe large negative interac-tions across platforms, especially TikTok highlighting that a smaller subset of messages get more exposure on other platforms and that algorithm plays a significant role on platforms other than Reddit. 

## D.7 Amplification of Exposure 

We examine the quantity of exposure conditional on a message receiving at least one view. The dependent variable is the logarithm of exposure counts, and the model is estimated from the Gaussian family. This approach captures the amplification stage, where content that passes the initial selection threshold may receive varying levels of attention. Table 9: Gaussian regression on the log-transformed number of exposures, estimated for mes-sages that receive at least one exposure Term Estimate Std. Error z-value p-value Intercept −0.183 * 0.089 −2.07 0.039 Hot algorithm 0.002 0.105 0.02 0.987 Facebook 2.214 *** 0.078 28.52 <0.001 TikTok 2.069 *** 0.076 27.24 <0.001 Twitter 2.521 *** 0.078 32.27 <0.001 Illuminating 0.399 *** 0.054 7.44 <0.001 Motivating 0.343 *** 0.053 6.42 <0.001 Hot × Facebook −0.443 *** 0.112 −3.97 <0.001 Hot × TikTok 6.168 *** 0.176 34.96 <0.001 Hot × Twitter −0.455 *** 0.114 −4.00 <0.001          

> Notes: Reference category is Reddit platform with LIFO algorithm. Significance levels: * p<0.05 , ** p<0.01 , *** p<0.001 .

Table 9 highlights that conditional on exposure, platform effects are strongly positive and content features also increase reach. The key result is the large positive TikTok and hot algorithm interaction. This implies that while the hot algorithm suppresses exposure probability (as seen in Section D.6), it produces extreme amplification for the small subset of content. 

## D.8 Structural Selection into Visibility 

We estimate the probability that a message has reach (i.e., ended up in the agent’s queue), which might not be explicitly viewed by the agent for resharing or liking (i.e., exposure). Similar to Section D.6, it is a logistic regression with a binary outcome. Through this process, we assess whether the patterns observed in realized exposure reflect underlying platform design. Table 10 shows that the model closely replicates the exposure binary results, showing that structural visibility and actual exposure are governed by similar processes. 27 Table 10: Logistic regression estimates of whether a message ended up in agent’s queues inde-pendent of exposure Term Estimate Std. Error z-value p-value Intercept −7.312 *** 0.062 −117 .38 <0.001 Hot algorithm −0.000 0.074 0.00 1.000 Facebook 2.472 *** 0.055 44.97 <0.001 TikTok 3.258 *** 0.054 60.48 <0.001 Twitter 2.303 *** 0.055 41.62 <0.001 Illuminating 2.311 *** 0.039 58.96 <0.001 Motivating 2.327 *** 0.039 59.26 <0.001 Hot × Facebook −0.619 *** 0.079 −7.84 <0.001 Hot × TikTok −4.559 *** 0.124 −36 .76 <0.001 Hot × Twitter −0.831 *** 0.080 −10 .34 <0.001          

> Notes: Reference category is Reddit platform with LIFO algorithm. Significance levels: * p<0.05 , ** p<0.01 , *** p<0.001 .

## D.9 Amplification of Reach 

We examine the extent of reach conditional on a message receiving at least one queue entry, using a log-normal regression (Gaussian family on log-transformed counts). This model captures how deeply messages penetrate the system structurally, independent of whether agents actively review them. Table 11: Gaussian regression on the log-transformed number of reach, estimated for messages that receive at least one queue entry Term Estimate Std. Error z-value p-value Intercept 0.466 *** 0.098 4.77 <0.001 Hot algorithm −0.000 0.116 0.00 0.999 Facebook 4.503 *** 0.086 52.52 <0.001 TikTok 8.420 *** 0.084 100.34 <0.001 Twitter 5.286 *** 0.086 61.25 <0.001 Illuminating 0.324 *** 0.059 5.47 <0.001 Motivating 0.222 *** 0.059 3.76 <0.001 Hot × Facebook −0.632 *** 0.123 −5.13 <0.001 Hot × TikTok 0.053 0.195 0.27 0.786 Hot × Twitter −0.634 *** 0.125 −5.05 <0.001          

> Notes: Reference category is Reddit platform with LIFO algorithm. Random intercept for simulation seed included but not shown. Significance levels: * p<0.05 , ** p<0.01 , *** p<0.001 .

## D.10 Selection into Resharing 

We predict whether a message receives any reshares using logistic regression. 28 Table 12: Logistic regression estimates of the probability that a message receives at least one reshare Term Estimate Std. Error z-value p-value Intercept −7.391 *** 0.064 −115 .36 <0.001 Hot algorithm −0.000 0.077 0.00 1.000 Facebook 2.535 *** 0.057 44.54 <0.001 TikTok 3.335 *** 0.056 59.76 <0.001 Twitter 2.379 *** 0.057 41.59 <0.001 Illuminating 2.317 *** 0.039 58.88 <0.001 Motivating 2.326 *** 0.039 59.01 <0.001 Hot × Facebook −0.625 *** 0.082 −7.65 <0.001 Hot × TikTok −4.559 *** 0.126 −36 .27 <0.001 Hot × Twitter −0.831 *** 0.083 −10 .02 <0.001          

> Notes: Reference category is Reddit platform with LIFO algorithm. Significance levels: * p<0.05 , ** p<0.01 , *** p<0.001 .

Table 12 highlights that the reshare probability follows the same structure as exposure sug-gesting that engagement behavior is highly related to visibility mechanisms. 

## D.11 Amplification of Resharing 

We examine the number of reshares conditional on receiving at least one reshare. The dependent variable is log-transformed, and the model captures the intensity of diffusion among content that has already begun to spread. Table 13: Gaussian regression on the log-transformed number of reshares, estimated for messages with at least one reshare Term Estimate Std. Error z-value p-value Intercept −0.528 *** 0.040 −13 .08 <0.001 Hot algorithm −0.000 0.048 −0.01 0.994 Facebook 0.300 *** 0.036 8.42 <0.001 TikTok 0.094 ** 0.035 2.69 0.007 Twitter 0.355 *** 0.036 9.92 <0.001 Illuminating 0.527 *** 0.024 22.10 <0.001 Motivating 0.525 *** 0.024 22.11 <0.001 Hot × Facebook 0.049 0.051 0.96 0.339 Hot × TikTok 3.574 *** 0.079 45.10 <0.001 Hot × Twitter 0.050 0.052 0.97 0.334          

> Notes: Reference category is Reddit platform with LIFO algorithm. Significance levels: * p<0.05 , ** p<0.01 , *** p<0.001 .

Table 13 highlights that platform effects are smaller but still positive. Additionally, TikTok stands out such that the large positive interaction indicates extreme amplification of viral content. 29 D.12 Selection into Likes 

We predict whether a message receives any like using logistic regression. Table 14: Logistic regression estimates of the probability that a message receives at least one like Term Estimate Std. Error z-value p-value Intercept −10 .060 *** 0.151 −66 .62 <0.001 Hot algorithm −0.000 0.202 0.00 1.000 Facebook 3.904 *** 0.145 26.97 <0.001 TikTok 4.454 *** 0.144 30.90 <0.001 Twitter 3.785 *** 0.145 26.12 <0.001 Illuminating 1.801 *** 0.052 34.48 <0.001 Motivating 3.937 *** 0.056 70.13 <0.001 Hot × Facebook −0.665 ** 0.206 −3.23 0.001 Hot × TikTok −4.178 *** 0.238 −17 .55 <0.001 Hot × Twitter −0.832 *** 0.206 −4.03 <0.001          

> Notes: Reference category is Reddit platform with LIFO algorithm. Significance levels: * p<0.05 , ** p<0.01 , *** p<0.001 .

Table 14 highlights that the probability of receiving any likes is more selective than exposure. Motivating content has a particularly large effect, suggesting emotional engagement could play a key role. The hot algorithm again suppresses participation broadly, especially on TikTok. 

## D.13 Amplification of Likes 

We examine the number of likes conditional on receiving at least one like. The outcome is log-transformed, and the model captures the intensity of user engagement. Table 15: Gaussian regression on the log-transformed number of likes, estimated for messages receiving at least one like Term Estimate Std. Error z-value p-value Intercept −1.199 *** 0.177 −6.784 <0.001 Hot algorithm 0.000 0.237 0.000 1.000 Facebook 1.337 *** 0.169 7.900 <0.001 TikTok 0.943 *** 0.169 5.598 <0.001 Twitter 1.502 *** 0.169 8.863 <0.001 Illuminating 0.185 ** 0.060 3.077 0.002 Motivating 1.853 *** 0.064 28.845 <0.001 Hot × Facebook 0.024 0.240 0.100 0.920 Hot × TikTok 3.991 *** 0.279 14.327 <0.001 Hot × Twitter 0.038 0.241 0.157 0.875          

> Notes: Reference category is Reddit platform with LIFO algorithm. Significance levels: * p<0.05 , ** p<0.01 , *** p<0.001 .

30 Table 15 highlights that there are modest platform effects. TikTok shows a large amplification effect under hot algorithm, confirming that viral engagement is highly concentrated. 

## D.14 Exposure Contrasts 

We present contrasts for exposure to quantify how the Hot algorithm compares to LIFO within each platform, as well as how platforms differ from one another under a common baseline. We use two models, the first provides us with the probability of receiving any exposure (binary model) and second model presents the amount of exposure conditional on being seen (count model). Table 16: Pairwise comparisons based on estimated marginal means. Binary contrasts reflect dif-ferences in receiving any exposure; count contrasts reflect differences in log exposure conditional on exposure. Contrast Estimate Std. Error z-value p-value 

Algorithm (LIFO − Hot) 

Reddit (Binary) 0.000 0.074 0.00 1.000 Facebook (Binary) 0.619*** 0.079 7.84 <0.001 TikTok (Binary) 4.559*** 0.124 36.76 <0.001 Twitter (Binary) 0.831*** 0.080 10.34 <0.001 Reddit (Count) −0.002 0.105 −0.02 0.987 Facebook (Count) 0.443*** 0.112 3.97 <0.001 TikTok (Count) −6.168 *** 0.176 −34 .96 <0.001 Twitter (Count) 0.455*** 0.114 4.00 <0.001 

Platform (LIFO baseline) 

Reddit − Facebook −2.472 *** 0.055 −44 .97 <0.001 Reddit − TikTok −3.258 *** 0.054 −60 .48 <0.001 Reddit − Twitter −2.303 *** 0.055 −41 .62 <0.001 Facebook − TikTok −0.786 *** 0.021 −36 .56 <0.001 Facebook − Twitter 0.170*** 0.025 6.81 <0.001 TikTok − Twitter 0.956*** 0.025 38.64 <0.001          

> Significance levels: * p<0.05 , ** p<0.01 , *** p<0.001 .

Table 16 highlights that under LIFO relative to Hot, exposure probability is higher on Face-book, Twitter and especially TikTok, confirming that Hot strongly suppresses selection. However, conditional on exposure, the sign reverses on TikTok. The negative estimate for LIFO - Hot shows that Hot produces greater reach once content is selected. 

## D.15 Reshare Contrasts 

We report contrasts for resharing behavior separating the probability of receiving any reshares from the number of reshares conditional on diffusion. We use this method to assess how algo-rithmic ranking influences the initiation of diffusion as well as its eventual scale, and how these 31 dynamics vary across platforms. Table 17 highlights that reshare contrasts closely mirror expo-sure. The Hot algorithm reduces the probability of resharing across platforms but dramatically increases reshare counts on TikTok conditional on diffusion. We also observe that amplification effects for Facebook and Twitter are not significant in the count model which highlights that viral dynamics are concentrated on TikTok. Table 17: Pairwise comparisons for resharing behavior. Binary contrasts reflect differences in the probability of any reshare; count contrasts reflect differences in log reshares conditional on resharing. Contrast Estimate Std. Error z-value p-value 

Algorithm (LIFO − Hot) 

Reddit (Binary) 0.000 0.077 0.00 1.000 Facebook (Binary) 0.625*** 0.082 7.65 <0.001 TikTok (Binary) 4.559*** 0.126 36.27 <0.001 Twitter (Binary) 0.831*** 0.083 10.02 <0.001 Reddit (Count) 0.000 0.048 0.00 0.994 Facebook (Count) −0.049 0.051 −0.96 0.339 TikTok (Count) −3.574 *** 0.079 −45 .10 <0.001 Twitter (Count) −0.050 0.052 −0.97 0.334 

Platform (LIFO baseline) 

Reddit − Facebook −2.535 *** 0.057 −44 .54 <0.001 Reddit − TikTok −3.335 *** 0.056 −59 .76 <0.001 Reddit − Twitter −2.379 *** 0.057 −41 .59 <0.001 Facebook − TikTok −0.800 *** 0.022 −36 .30 <0.001 Facebook − Twitter 0.156*** 0.025 6.24 <0.001 TikTok − Twitter 0.956*** 0.026 36.90 <0.001          

> Significance levels: * p<0.05 , ** p<0.01 , *** p<0.001 .

## D.16 Like Contrasts 

We present contrasts for liking behavior, distinguishing between the probability of receiving any likes and the number of likes conditional on engagement. These comparisons provide a direct measure of how algorithms and platforms shape user reactions from initial interaction to the intensity of engagement. Table 18 highlights that the Hot algorithm reduces the likelihood of receiving any likes but strongly increases like counts on TikTok once engagement occurs. We also observe that platform contrasts show that TikTok generates the highest engagement overall, followed by Twitter and Facebook, with Reddit again as a low baseline. 

## D.17 Encounter-Level Models of Information Quality 

To establish whether platform architecture and recommendation algorithm causally affect the quality of content agents encounter, we fitted two encounter-level Gaussian mixed-effects models 32 Table 18: Pairwise comparisons for liking behavior. Binary contrasts reflect differences in the probability of receiving any likes; count contrasts reflect differences in log likes conditional on receiving at least one. Contrast Estimate Std. Error z-value p-value 

Algorithm (LIFO − Hot) 

Reddit (Binary) 0.000 0.202 0.00 1.000 Facebook (Binary) 0.665** 0.206 3.23 0.001 TikTok (Binary) 4.178*** 0.238 17.55 <0.001 Twitter (Binary) 0.832*** 0.206 4.03 <0.001 Reddit (Count) 0.000 0.237 0.00 1.000 Facebook (Count) −0.024 0.240 −0.10 0.920 TikTok (Count) −3.991 *** 0.279 −14 .327 <0.001 Twitter (Count) −0.038 0.241 −0.16 0.875 

Platform (LIFO baseline) 

Reddit − Facebook −3.904 *** 0.145 −26 .97 <0.001 Reddit − TikTok −4.454 *** 0.144 −30 .90 <0.001 Reddit − Twitter −3.785 *** 0.145 −26 .12 <0.001 Facebook − TikTok −0.550 *** 0.040 −13 .75 <0.001 Facebook − Twitter 0.119** 0.042 2.83 0.005 TikTok − Twitter 0.669*** 0.042 15.93 <0.001          

> Significance levels: * p<0.05 , ** p<0.01 , *** p<0.001 .

33 predicting message quality at the agent-message level, using all agent-message encounters in the exposures. Both models included platform architecture (Reddit, Facebook, Twitter, TikTok; reference: Reddit), recommendation algorithm (LIFO, Hot; reference: LIFO), their interaction, and agent quality preference as fixed effects, with random intercepts for message nested within seed (1 ∣ seed/msg_id) to account for the non-independence of multiple agents encountering the same message. The total effect model included no content composition controls; the controlled model additionally included illuminating and motivating as covariates, allowing decomposition of the direct effect of platform and algorithm on encountered content quality from any indirect effect operating through differential surfacing of content types. Model fit for the controlled model was assessed using DHARMa nonparametric dispersion tests (dispersion = 1.028 , p = .672 ), confirming adequate fit (see Table 19). The key comparison is the Hot × TikTok interaction term: b = −0.336 in the total effect model and b = −0.305 in the controlled model. Controlling for content composition attenuated the TikTok/Hot coefficient by only 9%, indicating that 91% of the quality collapse under TikTok/Hot is a direct effect of the algorithm operating within TikTok’s unconstrained architecture, not an artifact of differential surfacing of illuminating or motivating content. 

# E Descriptive Statistics by Platform and Algorithm 

Table 20 presents Breadth and depth of information spread by platform, algorithm, and outcome. 34 Table 19: Encounter-level Gaussian mixed-effects models predicting message quality ( val ) at the agent-message level. Each row = one agent–message encounter. Both models include random intercepts for message nested within seed. The total effect model includes no content composi-tion controls; the controlled model additionally includes illuminating and motivating . Reference category: Reddit platform, LIFO algorithm. The 9% attenuation of the Hot × TikTok coefficient from total to controlled model indicates that 91% of the TikTok/Hot quality collapse is a direct architectural effect. 

Total effect Controlled Term b 95% CI b 95% CI Intercept 0.341 *** [0.327 , 0.356 ] 0.154 *** [0.139 , 0.170 ]

Hot algorithm 0.000 [−0.013 , 0.013 ] 0.000 [−0.013 , 0.013 ]

Facebook −0.024 *** [−0.037 , −0.011 ] −0.024 *** [−0.037 , −0.011 ]

Twitter −0.014 * [−0.027 , −0.001 ] −0.010 [−0.023 , 0.003 ]

TikTok 0.039 *** [0.026 , 0.052 ] 0.036 *** [0.023 , 0.049 ]

Agent Quality Preference 0.001 *** [0.001 , 0.001 ] 0.001 *** [0.001 , 0.001 ]

illuminating — — 0.206 *** [0.202 , 0.210 ]

motivating — — 0.115 *** [0.111 , 0.119 ]

Hot × Facebook −0.003 [−0.016 , 0.010 ] −0.005 [−0.018 , 0.008 ]

Hot × Twitter −0.043 *** [−0.055 , −0.030 ] −0.039 *** [−0.052 , −0.026 ]

Hot × TikTok −0.336 *** [−0.349 , −0.323 ] −0.305 *** [−0.318 , −0.292 ]

Random effects (SD) 

msg_id:seed 0.469 0.473 

seed 0.000 0.000 

Residual 0.106 0.106 

Model fit 

AIC −2,437 ,531 −2,447 ,608 

DHARMa dispersion — 1.028 , p = .672       

> *p<.05 ; *** p<.001 . Confidence intervals are 95% Wald CIs. Random effects reported as standard deviations. The near-zero seed SD in both models indicates negligible between-run variability after accounting for message-level random effects. Negative AIC values arise because the Gaussian log-likelihood can exceed zero when residual variance is small relative to the outcome scale.

35 Table 20: Breadth and depth of information spread by platform, algorithm, and outcome. Breadth = proportion of messages receiving at least one engagement event from any agent. Depth = mean number of unique agents engaging with each message, among messages with any engagement, reported as both arithmetic mean ( M ) and geometric mean ( GM ): M corresponds to the uncon-ditional mean calculation (breadth × depth); GM corresponds directly to the log-normal model coefficients and is the primary inferential statistic. Under LIFO, Twitter produced greater depth than Facebook across all four outcomes on both mean measures (reach: GM = 433 vs 197 ; ex-posure: GM = 16 .0 vs 11 .6; reshares: GM = 1.55 vs 1.45 ; likes: GM = 4.88 vs 4.09 ), consistent with Moses’ prediction that Twitter’s network architecture is more flexible than Facebook’s lay-ered hierarchy. The TikTok seen2 ceiling effect ( GM = 9,999 ) reflects that virtually all messages that enter circulation reach every agent’s queue structurally; the meaningful distinction between TikTok conditions lies in active review depth, which increases 447-fold under Hot ( GM = 4,563 

vs 10 .2). 

Reach Exposure Reshares Likes Platform Alg. B M GM B M GM B M GM B M GM 

Reddit LIFO 0.8% 2.3 2.19 0.8% 1.4 1.28 0.8% 1.13 1.09 0.1% 1.14 1.10 Reddit Hot 0.8% 2.3 2.19 0.8% 1.4 1.28 0.8% 1.13 1.09 0.1% 1.14 1.10 Facebook LIFO 8.8% 683 197 8.8% 37.7 11.6 8.7% 2.08 1.45 5.0% 11.2 4.09 Facebook Hot 5.0% 574 104 5.0% 115 7.46 4.9% 4.02 1.52 2.7% 29.7 4.04 Twitter LIFO 7.5% 987 433 7.5% 43.0 16.0 7.5% 2.24 1.55 4.5% 12.3 4.88 Twitter Hot 3.5% 920 230 3.5% 180 10.1 3.5% 5.28 1.63 2.0% 41.0 4.80 TikTok LIFO 16.9% 9,999 9,999 16.9% 13.1 10.2 16.9% 1.31 1.21 8.1% 4.10 3.02 TikTok Hot 0.2% 9,999 9,999 0.2% 5,807 4,563 0.2% 92.5 39.0 0.1% 959 129      

> B= breadth (proportion of all messages receiving any engagement from at least one agent). M= arithmetic mean depth; GM = geometric mean depth. Both depth measures computed among messages with at least one engagement event. Reach (seen2) = number of unique agents whose queue contained the message. Exposure (seen3) = number of unique agents who reviewed the message in their active review pool. Reshares and Likes = number of unique agents who reshared or liked the message. TikTok seen2 values of 9,999 reflect a ceiling effect: the agent population is 10,000 and virtually all messages that enter circulation reach every agent’s queue structurally; the meaningful distinction between TikTok conditions lies in active review depth (seen3).

36