Title: Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.23807v1

Published Time: Mon, 25 May 2026 01:10:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
# DYNAMIC QUERY MODIFICATION FOR BINARY LOCALITY 

# SENSITIVE HASHING 

PREPRINT 

Ben Claydon, Richard Connor, Alan Dearle 

University of St Andrews St Andrews, Scotland 

{bc89,rchc,al }@st-andrews.ac.uk 

May 2026 

# ABSTRACT 

Our context of interest is how binary locality sensitive hash (LSH) functions can be used to solve the approximate near neighbour (ANN) problem, which seeks to find the k closest elements of some dataset X ⊂ Rd to some further point q ∈ Rd presented as a query. Binary locality sensitive function families H are sets of functions each with signature h : x ∈ Rd → 0|1. A function is locality sensitive if and only if the output of the function is more likely to be equal (a ‘hash collision’) if two close vectors are used as input than if two far vectors are used. A data structure can be built by generating binary hash codes for each member of X, which are generated by drawing and applying one or more functions from H. When q is presented as a query, the same set of functions is applied to it and those elements of X with equal binary hash codes are retrieved. In this paper we introduce dynamic query modification . This process changes q at query time to form a new value c, which by theoretical and experimental analysis we prove has two significant advantages. Firstly, the hash output of c collides with near neighbours with a greater probability than q. Secondly, we show there is little chance of c failing to collide with any near neighbours; a property which we demonstrate is not true for q.To demonstrate the efficacy of the technique, we define a novel structure MQ-Forest, a modified version of RP-Forest. Both are binary LSH-based ANN mechanisms, but MQ-Forest dynamically estimates a value for c during the query process. We show that MQ-Forest reduces both build and query times by up to 40% when measured over several large, high-dimensional benchmark datasets. 

# 1 Introduction 

Searching collections of large, high-dimensional data is an increasingly important task in modern applications. Our context of interest is finding an approximation of the k closest elements of some dataset X ⊂ Rd to some further point q ∈ Rd presented as a query. We exclusively consider hyperspherical spaces, which are those where all vectors have an ℓ2-norm of 1. Finding the exact k nearest neighbours to q in high-dimensional datasets is known to require a similarity comparison between q and each member of X due to the ‘curse of dimensionality’. However, scalable solutions to such queries are required by many applications. Approximate near neighbour (ANN) solutions allow search in sublinear time. One technique used by algorithms in this category is locality sensitive hashing (LSH). Binary LSH functions accept a point x ∈ Rd as input, and return a binary output value. They possess the property that the output of the function when applied to two near points is more likely to be equal (a ‘hash collision’) than when the function is applied to two far points. 

> arXiv:2605.23807v1 [cs.CG] 22 May 2026

Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

It may seem intuitive that the query sits at the centre of knn (q). We show that this is not typically the case which introduces significant pathologies for LSH based mechanisms. This introduces the surprising possibility that there exists an input to LSH functions which more effectively retrieves knn (q).In this paper, we describe a significant improvement which can be made to LSH-based ANN algorithms based on some novel mathematical observations on high-dimensional spaces. We make the following observations: • In Section 4, we demonstrate the existence of a set Φ ⊂ Rd. Each member of Φ has the property that, when used as input to a locality sensitive hash function, they have a higher probability than q of hash colliding with near neighbours of q. If an element of Φ can be identified and queried in place of q, the performance of LSH-based ANN algorithms can be improved as near neighbours of q will be retrieved with a greater frequency. • In Section 5, we provide a practical and fast method to compute a member of Φ at query time, which can be used to accelerate the performance of binary LSH based mechanisms. • In Section 6, we apply the methods described in Section 5 to a popular binary LSH based ANN algorithm: RP-Forest. We validate the properties of our query modification technique by contrasting the behaviour of a modified and unmodified version of RP-Forest over large, high-dimensional benchmark datasets. We show that our modification to the algorithm results in reduced build and query times when compared to a baseline implementation. 

# 2 Related Work 

2.1 Locality Sensitive Hashing 

LSH was introduced by Indyk and Motwani [13] as a method for searching high-dimensional spaces. A family of functions H is locality sensitive if and only if there exists a p1 > p 2 and t1 < t 2 which satisfy inequalities 1 and 2 for all functions h ∈ H . A corollary of this property is that for any two points x, y, the probability Pr( h(x) = h(y)) 

decreases monotonically as || x, y|| 2 increases. 

Pr( h(x) = h(y)) ≥ p1 | || x − y|| 2 ≤ t1 (1) 

Pr( h(x) = h(y)) ≤ p2 | || x − y|| 2 > t 2 (2) Charikar introduced a binary LSH function for Euclidean spaces using randomly generated hyperplanes which pass through the origin [3]. A hash value of 1 is assigned to a point x if it is above the hyperplane, or 0 otherwise. This LSH function family is almost identical to the node subdivision procedure found in Random Projection Forests (see Section 2.2); the latter only differs from Charikar’s original formulation by shifting the hyperplane a random amount from the origin. Locality sensitivity based ANN algorithms can be viewed abstractly in a manner described by Lv [20]: By concatenating multiple LSH functions, the collision probability of far away objects becomes very small ( p2), but it also reduces the collision probability of nearby objects ( p1). As a result, multiple hash tables are needed in order to find most of the nearby objects. 

2.2 RP-Trees and RP-Forests 

The RP-Tree data structure was first introduced by Dasgupta and Freund as a variant of the KD-Tree suitable for searching high-dimensional spaces [7]. To build an RP-Tree, a node is initialised which forms the root of the tree, and all points in a dataset X ⊂ Rd are assigned to this node. Thereafter, a tree is constructed by repeatedly subdividing any node containing a number of points greater than some user-defined parameter ns into two child nodes. To subdivide a node, any point x contained in the node whereby w · x > a , for some plane w and some real value a,are assigned to the left child, and all other points to the right child. The value a is uniformly randomly generated with upper and lower bounds equal to the greatest height above and below w of any point contained in the node. When 

a = 0 , this hash function is analogous to Charikar’s hyperplane LSH. The query procedure of an RP-Tree begins at the root node, where the predicate w · q > a is computed using the same instance of w and a which split the root node. If this predicate is true, then the left subtree is recursively searched, or the right subtree is recursively searched if not. This process continues until a leaf node is encountered, and the objects 2Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

contained therein are retrieved as a ‘candidate set’. Only points in the candidate set will be measured for similarity to 

q, and the k closest returned as the approximate near neighbour set. As this paper discusses two separate families of binary LSH function, we refer to Hrp as the LSH schema used by RP-Forest, and Hc as the binary LSH schema defined by Charikar. We use H to refer to any binary LSH function family. RP-Forest is an ensemble of several independently constructed RP-Trees. When a query is presented, each RP-Tree is searched, and a candidate set is formed by taking the union of all objects retrieved from the trees. We use Yan et al.’s formulation of RP-Forest, laid out in Algorithm 1 of their study [30]. Applications include studies on gene data [9] [31], pose estimation [17] [18], and outlier detection [27]. 

2.3 Query Modification 

Here we review methods of modifying a user-provided query vector to permit the accelerated retrieval of relevant elements from a large collection, which is also the aim of the novel query modification algorithm we present. 

2.3.1 Multiprobe LSH 

There are two forms of mutiprobe LSH: entropy-based [20] and those which are dependent on LSH bin geometry such as the schema introduced by Andoni et al. for the cross-polytope LSH family [1]. We will focus on the former, as it is a technique which relies on truly modifying the query vector rather than an additional step in an LSH-based query mechanism. Entropy-based multiprobe is the process of perturbing a query vector by a random Gaussian vector in order to change its hash value. If the degree of perturbation is scaled appropriately, then a new vector is generated which is similar to the original query but hashes to a different value. Additional candidates may be retrieved from this new hash bin, as it is also likely to contain items which are similar to q. The query does not need to be re-hashed to find additional relevant objects, which reduces the amount of space and time required by the LSH-based ANN algorithm. The methods we present also rely on modifying the query to raise the likelihood of retrieving similar objects to the query by identifying and using a point in Φ. However, we exploit information gained during a search procedure, as opposed to an entirely random perturbation. In this way, our query modification method is complementary to multiprobe LSH as both techniques can be used simultaneously. 

2.3.2 Relevance Feedback 

The idea of modifying a query to permit the retrieval of more relevant objects from a large collection is well established as ‘relevance feedback’ in the domain of information retrieval. Relevance feedback attempts to solve the problem of different users of an information retrieval (IR) system having different needs. Results retrieved by an IR system may be relevant to some users, but not others depending on the requirements of their query. To solve this problem, users are asked to provide relevance feedback on each member of the set of results retrieved by the IR system. This feedback can take the form of the binary label ‘relevant’ or ‘not relevant’, or some numerical score of relevance [32]. Upon receiving this feedback, the IR system will formulate a new query, and perform another search using it. This new query should somehow be more similar to the ‘relevant’ documents, and dissimilar to the ‘irrelevant’ documents. One classical example of a method to modify a query vector using relevance feedback is Rocchio’s algorithm [26]. This algorithm modifies the query vector in the following way: 

u = aq + b 1

Dr

X

> r∈Dr

r − c 1

Dnr 

X

> n∈Dnr

n (3) where a, b, c are some weights, Dr is the set of relevant items as judged by the user, and Dnr are the irrelevant items. Rocchio’s algorithm is conceptually simple: it moves the query vector closer to the centroid of the set of relevant objects, and away from the centroid of irrelevant objects. Rocchio’s algorithm is applied iteratively by generating several sets of results and incorporating new user feedback for each. Examples of systems which use relevance feedback in this way are [28] and [5]. This iterative process will result in a query which is personalised to the user’s specific requirements. 3Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

2.3.3 Pseudo-Relevance Feedback 

Relevance feedback assumes that there is a human in the loop, who guides the query as it progresses. Some IR systems utilise pseudo-relevence feedback (PRF), which assumes the most similar documents to the query are ‘relevant’ and others are ‘not relevant’. This technique permits the refining of queries automatically, without additional human input. Examples of use of this technique include local context analysis [29], which is a method of applying PRF to document retrieval. After results are retrieved by the IR system, local context analysis automatically forms a new ‘expanded’ query by selecting new keywords based on those which frequently occur in retrieved documents. An expanded query is a query which has been modified to include additional relevant information. Results show that this expanded query retrieves more relevant documents than the original. This technique can also be used in dense vector spaces, such as the ones we study. Kuzi et. al. studied the retrieval of documents using expanded queries [16]. Instead of an iterative method, queries were expanded using similar words as judged by a Word2Vec [21] word embedding model trained on the document corpus. This form of PRF was also shown to produce a query which improves retrieval of relevant documents. Faggioli et al [8] presented a learning-based approach to form an expanded query by selecting some small number of important dimensions of the original query embedding, and setting the rest to 0. By modifying the query in this way, the authors showed that more relevant documents are retrieved than when the original query is used. Furthermore, query expansion methods for LSH algorithms have been attempted [6] [11] [15] with learning based approaches. 

# 3 Properties of Generic LSH Mechanisms 

Any family of locality sensitive functions must obey Inequalities 1 and 2. In the context of the ANN problem, the property of interest is what fraction of knn (q) collide with q. However, the properties of an LS function family make no such guarantees in the latter context. In previous work, we have shown how this lack of guarantee can hinder binary LSH based ANN mechanisms signifi-cantly [4]. There, we introduced the notion of a ‘hash failure’, and demonstrated they occur frequently. A hash failure occurs when q hash collides with only a small fraction of its near neighbours. A hash failure can occur because, even if the probability of hash collision between q and each of its near neighbours is individually high, these probabilities may be non-independent since this is not a property guaranteed by an LS function family. The existence of such failure cases particularly impacts the probability of hash collision between compound hash functions. Compound hash functions are formed from the combination of independently drawn hash functions. In the context of the binary hash functions we study, a compound hash function generates of a single binary string by concatenating the output of multiple independent binary LSH functions. A hash collision between two compound hash functions occurs when these binary strings are equal. A compound hash function collides with a number of elements of the k nearest neighbour set proportionally to the 

product of the recall of each constituent binary hash function. Therefore, the failure of any individual hash function is not tolerable. Figure 1a shows the distribution of knn (q) recalls after a large number of binary hash functions are applied to a dataset of image embeddings. As can be seen, many functions retrieve a very small fraction of the near neighbours. Figure 1b shows the same observations, where an element c ∈ Φ is used in place of q1. A fuller explanation of this experiment, and results on other datasets, are provided in Section 6.4. 

# 4 Query Modification 

Here we define how the query vector may be modified to construct a new vector which has greater probability of hash colliding with knn (q) than q. We formally define a set of vectors Φ which each have this property, and further define the point c ∈ Φ which maximises this probability. We show how to compute c given some knn (q). In Section 4.2, we show how to estimate c without full knowledge of knn (q), a process which in an imperfect estimate of c which is highly likely to be a member of Φ.    

> 1We will demonstrate how to derive cand Φin Section 4.1.

4Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT      

> (a) Using qas input to binary hash function (b) Using cas input to binary hash function

Figure 1: Fraction of points in knn (q) which hash collide with q and c respectively. Measured by applying 1000 

random functions from Hrp to 100 random queries, over the MirFlickr Dino2 dataset. It is possible for q to collide with only a small fraction of knn (q), whereas this is not possible for an element c ∈ Φ.

4.1 Defining Modified Query Quality 

We define the set Φ as those elements of Rd whose hashes are more likely to collide with knn (q) than q. We define a measure of this likelihood as the average collision probability between some point u ∈ Rd and each member of 

knn (q):

ACP (u, knn (q)) = 1

k

> k−1

X

> i=0

(Pr( h(u) = h(xi ∈ knn (q)) (4) We more formally define the set Φ to be those points where ACP (ϕ ∈ Rd) ≥ ACP (q). In Appendix B we describe a statistical model which computes the ACP function for the family Hrp , for arbitrary values of u and knn (q).Furthermore, in Section B.1, we also show that this model can be used to compute the ACPs for the family Hc as well. We further define a member c ∈ Φ which has the highest ACP of any member of Φ. In Appendix C, we prove the geometric centroid of the set knn (q) is the point which has the highest ACP of any member of Φ.

4.1.1 ‘Hash Failure’ Cases 

Maximising average collision probability is necessary but not sufficient to ensure good search outcomes. Hash failure cases must also be rare to ensure the reliable performance of compound hash functions. To prevent hash failure, we require a lack of correlation among outputs of a single hash function as applied to each element of knn (q). We refer to this as an average correlation value. This is because hash failures occur when the output of a single function is equal when applied to most members of knn (q) due to this correlation, and q hashes to a different value. In Appendix C.1, we provide a theoretical explanation of why hash failures occur, as well as a proof that hash failure cases become vanishingly unlikely when c is used as the input to hash functions. We show that the average correlation depends on only three geometric properties: the inter-point distances between members of knn (q), the distance between u and each member of knn (q), and the height of u above w. As the inter-point distances between members of knn (q) is a fixed quantity, and the height of u above w cannot be controlled as w is randomly generated, we may only influence the average correlation by changing the position of u. We demonstrate that when u = c, the average correlation is very close to the optimal minimum value. Furthermore, in Appendix D, we experimentally verify that the average correlation value is approximately 0 when measured over benchmark datasets. 

4.2 An Estimator for c With Incomplete Information 

Although we have shown that c has many positive properties, it is not possible to construct it without first knowing 

knn (q) completely. Thus, a procedure for producing an estimate of c (which we hereafter denote ˆc), which uses an estimate of the set knn (q) (which we denote \knn (q)) is required. Although ˆc cannot perform as well as c, we 5Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

show that it is nonetheless highly likely to be a member of the set Φ. In Appendix F, we demonstrate theoretically that taking the centroid of some \knn (q) is likely to produce a high-quality ˆc, if a small set of assumptions about the dataset hold true. Additionally, we show that the instance of \knn (q) provided to this procedure does not not need to be of a particularly high quality estimate to produce a useful instance of ˆc. It is this insight which enables the acceleration of existing LSH mechanisms by incorporating query modification in their search procedure without requiring any foreknowledge of knn (q).

4.3 Distance from Nearest Neighbour Centroid to Query 

Differentiating q and c is only worthwhile if these points are expected to be far from each other. If q were often approximately equal to c, then using c as input to LSH functions would provide little benefit. Now we show that these points are often distant, and therefore c is likely to serve as a substantially better input to LSH functions. In Section 6.3, we show experimentally that || q − c|| 2 is indeed large on datasets which are formed from the output of deep learning models, as well as a synthetic uniform dataset. As theoretical justification, in Appendix F Theorem 6, we show that || ˆc − c|| 2 < || q − c|| 2 with a high probability. In the process of showing this, we derived that the statistical distribution of distances || q − c|| 2 is distributed according to the chi distribution with m degrees of freedom, where m is the local intrinsic dimensionality at q:

|| q − c|| 2 ∼ σχ m (5) Here, σ is the standard deviation of underlying normal distribution which describes the individual co-ordinates of the vector q − c.As m becomes large as in high-dimensional spaces, the χm distribution becomes sharply concentrated at its mean value and has a very low probability of taking a value close to 0. Thus, if σ2 is not ‘too small’, the distance || q − c|| 2

will be significant. 

4.4 Normalising ˆc

Although we have shown c to be the input to hash functions, it does not exist within the hyperspherical space that we study. To rectify this, we set the ℓ2-norm of any instance of ˆc to 1 via scalar division. Thus we define a further point: 

⟨ˆc⟩ def 

= ˆc

|| ˆc|| (6) Similarly, we define ⟨c⟩ as the normalised vector c. Note that the rank-ordering of distances between ˆc and each member of X is identical to the rank ordering of distances between ⟨ˆc⟩ and X.

# 5 Description of LSH Algorithm Modification 

5.1 Overview 

In Section 5.2, we describe a modification which can be made to binary LSH mechanisms which creates, refines, and utilises an estimate of ˆc at query time. In Section 5.3, we discuss the computational cost of computing ˆc and present a method for accelerating it. 

5.2 Structure of LSH-Based ANN Algorithms 

In the parlance of this paper, LSH-based ANN algorithms can abstractly be described as: • All LSH-based ANN mechanisms store one or more independent compound hash functions for each member of X. These are constructed at preprocessing time. • When a query is presented, LSH-based ANN mechanisms apply the same set of compound hash functions to the query. Only those points from X where at least one compound hash collision has occurred are retrieved as a candidate set. • By increasing the number of compound hash functions stored, the expected recall will increase, at the cost of additional preprocessing and query time. 6Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

(a) Abstract model of an LSH-based ANN query algorithm. 

(b) Abstract LSH-based ANN query algorithm which uses query updates. 

Figure 2: Comparison of query algorithm for: abstract LSH-based ANN model (above) and our modification (below). 7Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

A flowchart detailing one possible implementation of this process is shown in Figure 2a. This abstract LSH algorithm begins by hashing the query point to create the first compound hash function. A set Z is generated from those members of X which have not been previously retrieved. Elements of Z are re-ranked, and a candidate set is maintained of the 

k closest to q. This process repeats for each independent compound hash function before returning the candidate set. Our modification to this class of algorithm is shown by the flowchart in Figure 2b. In outline, our approach is to derive an instance of ⟨ˆc⟩ from the candidate set after each compound hash function is used to retrieve new objects. This derived instance of ⟨ˆc⟩ is then used as input to Phase 1 of the next compound hash function to be searched, which in turn returns new unseen points from X from which a new ⟨ˆc⟩ can be estimated. Due to the analysis performed in Section 4.2, we expect that this derived ⟨ˆc⟩ will be a member of Φ with a high probability. Thus, using ⟨ˆc⟩ as input to the compound hash function instead of q will result in both a greater probability of hash collision with near neighbours of q, as well as a decreased probability of hash failure. For each iteration, the estimate ⟨ˆc⟩ will become an increasingly better estimate of ⟨c⟩.

5.3 Cost of Query Update 

Naively, the cost of computing the centroid of k points is of O(k). As this work must be repeated each time new elements are added to the candidate set, the cost of re-computing ⟨ˆc⟩ could begin to outweigh any benefit it provides. Thus, we consider how elements of the candidate set may be stored and provide an algorithm which may reduce the cost of computing its centroid. Information on the candidate set can be stored in a priority queue Q where the closest elements to q are given greatest priority. Q may contain at most k elements; if a new element is added and the size of the queue would exceed k, the lowest priority item is removed. When an instance of ⟨ˆc⟩ is required, the ℓ2-normalised centroid of the elements of Q

may be computed in k + 1 vector operations. We may reduce this computational cost by storing a further vector s, which stores the value P 

> x∈Q

x. When a point x

is added to Q, we set s = s + x. If a point y is removed from Q as a result of x being inserted, we set s = s − y. To compute ⟨ˆc⟩, we need only to divide s by its ℓ2-norm, which is an extremely fast operation. Algorithm 1 details how 

Q and s may be updated using a set of points Z, which were retrieved via hashing as in phase 2 of Figure 2b. 

Algorithm 1 Updating Q and s 

> 1:

z ← min (Z) Assign to z the point in Z closest to q 

> 2:

t ← max (Q) Assign to t the point furthest from q in Q 

> 3:

while |Q| < k do  

> 4:

Z ← Z \ { z} Remove the closest element from Z 

> 5:

Q ← Q ∪ { z} Add z to Q 

> 6:

s ← s + z Update s 

> 7:

z ← min (Z) 

> 8:

t ← max (Q) 

> 9:

end while  

> 10:

while || t − q|| 2 > || z − q|| 2 do  

> 11:

Z ← Z \ { z} Remove the closest element to q from Z 

> 12:

Q ← Q \ { t} Remove t from Q 

> 13:

s ← s − t + z Update s 

> 14:

Q ← Q ∪ { z} Add the new closest point  

> 15:

z ← min (Z) Assign to z the point in Z closest to q 

> 16:

t ← max (Q) Assign to t the point furthest from q in Q 

> 17:

end while 

The cost of updating s in this way is proportional to the number of points added and removed from Q. Therefore, Algorithm 1 only saves time if there are fewer than k insertions and removals to Q at any one time. If more than k

operations are required, then computing the centroid in the naive fashion becomes the faster option. In Appendix E, we show experimentally that there are often far fewer than k insertions and removals to Q after an RP-Tree is searched, thereby validating the practical applicability of this technique. 

# 6 Experiments 

We experimentally verify claims made in the previous sections by performing the following experiments: 8Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT   

> (a) GloVe Recall (b) MirFlickr Dino2 Recall
> (c) GooAQ Recall (d) Uniform Recall

Figure 3: Recall results for an RP-Forest and MQ-Forest consisting of y trees. Note that the degree of vertical difference between the two curves represents improvement; lower is better. For example, MirFlickr can be searched at a recall of approximately 75% in 96 trees for RP-Forest, and approximately 43 for MQ-Forest whilst reducing the number of distance calculations. 1. In Section 6.2, we demonstrate the effect of modifying RP-Forest using the techniques outlined in Section 5. We show the efficacy of our technique by measuring decreased build and query time compared to the baseline algorithm. 2. In Section 6.3, we experimentally verify claims made in Section 4.3 that the points q and c are often dissim-ilar. 3. In Section 6.4, we show that hash failures are essentially eliminated when c is used as input to hash functions. 4. In Section 6.5, we measure the degree of approximation the set \knn (q) can possess before a useful instance of ⟨ˆc⟩ can no longer be derived using the procedure outlined in Section 4.2 and demonstrate that only a coarse estimation of the set knn (q) is required to compute a useful instance of ⟨ˆc⟩.

6.1 Datasets Used 

This paper studies four large, high dimensional datasets of differing modalities, which we describe in detail in Ap-pendix A. 

6.2 Experimental Comparison of MQ-Forest and RP-Forest 

We measure the performance of MQ-Forest, and compare it to the baseline RP-Forest algorithm. The MQ-Forest algorithm operates as follows: the first v trees of the RP and MQ-Forests execute identically (where v is a user defined parameter). Upon reaching the v + 1 th tree, the MQ-Forest uses the procedure outlined in Figure 2b, where the initial instance of ⟨ˆc⟩ is generated from the candidate set formed by searching the first v trees. A new estimate of ⟨ˆc⟩ is 9Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT   

> (a) GloVe Distance Computations (b) MirFlickr Dino2 Distance Computations
> (c) GooAQ Distance Computations (d) Uniform Distance Computations

Figure 4: Distance computations for an RP-Forest and MQ-Forest consisting of y trees. computed after each tree is searched, using the fast centroid computation algorithm as described in Algorithm 1. To measure the performance of each algorithm, we formulate the following experiment: 1. Draw and exclude 250 objects from each dataset for use as queries. 2. Build an RP-Forest and an MQ-Forest over the dataset, with a number of trees ranging from 8 to 96 . We fix ns = 500 and v = 8 . To make a direct comparison, we use exactly the same trees and associated hash functions for both the RP and MQ-Forest. 3. We use each object reserved as a query as input to the both the RP and MQ-Forest. For each query, we record the recall for k = 100 , and the number of distance computations required to serve the query. Note that we consider each vector addition as required by Algorithm 1 as a distance computation to ensure that the cost of centroid computation is taken into account. Figure 3 shows the number of trees which must be built and searched in order to achieve a fixed recall value. Figure 4 shows the number of distance computations required to search some number of trees. 

6.2.1 Discussion 

We find that, for all neural network derived datasets, the MQ-Forest achieves a higher average recall whilst requiring approximately the same number of distance computations to serve a query as RP-Forest with a fixed number of trees. From inspection of Figure 3, it can be seen that RP-Forest must build and search up to 78% more trees to achieve a fixed recall result than MQ-Forest, depending on the dataset. Thus, MQ-Forest can expect expedited build and query times comparatively. For example, for the GloVe dataset, RP-Forest achieves a recall of 0.49 after 96 trees have been searched. MQ-Forest requires only 68 trees be built and searched to achieve the same recall, a reduction of 29% . The number of metric 10 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT   

> (a) GloVe (b) DINOv2
> (c) GooAQ (d) Uniform 200D

Figure 5: RP-Forest and MQ-Forest: Recall vs Queries Per Second. Note the log-scale y axis. Searching for k = 20 

near neighbours. calls required for this search are also reduced; 32696 are required for the RP-Forest, compared with 25543 for the MQ-Forest, a 22% decrease. Our choice to use the GloVe dataset as an example here is deliberate, as it benefits the least of all neural network derived benchmark datasets from the query modification framework. For all other datasets, the MQ-Forest performs better relatively. However, for the uniform dataset, the MQ-Forest fails to improve performance. An explanation for poor performance of MQ-Forest in this scenario can be seen in Figure 7. It shows that it is difficult in the context of the uniform dataset to form a good instance of ⟨ˆc⟩ without a very good instance of \knn (q). As RP-Forest does not return a significant number of near neighbours for the uniform dataset, an insufficiently good estimate of \knn (q) could not be formed, thus leading MQ-Forest to fail. 

6.2.2 Fast Production Implementation 

We provide a production-ready headers-only library for Python, which is available for download from https: //github.com/benclaydon/rpforest_mtq/ . This version of MQ-Forest is derived from the RP-Forest imple-mentation available from https://github.com/lyst/rpforest . In Figure 5, we compare the query throughput of the existing RP-Forest system with our modification for each embedding dataset. We show that our system is achieves a higher query throughput for each embedding dataset. We once again emphasise that, as shown in Section 6.2, the MQ-Forest requires significantly less build time than RP-Forest. 11 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

Glove MirFlickr GOOAQ Uniform 200D 

|| q − ⟨ c⟩ || 2 0.59 0.58 0.44 0.33 

|| q − x1|| 2 0.77 0.71 0.31 1.15 

|| q − x10 || 2 0.84 0.78 0.49 1.18 

|| q − x100 || 2 0.91 0.86 0.69 1.20 Average Interpoint Distance 1.31 1.39 1.38 1.41 Table 1: Mean Euclidean distance from q to ⟨c⟩ and its k-th nearest neighbour for each embedding dataset and 

k = 1 , 10 , 100 . These distances are average observations measured using 100 randomly sampled vectors from each dataset. 

6.3 Observations on Distance Between q and ⟨c⟩

We show that q and ⟨c⟩ are often distant by computing their distance over a sample of 100 randomly drawn queries from each embedding dataset. The scale of these distances is large enough to cause q and ⟨c⟩ to frequently take different hash values. As an example, consider the smallest average distance of any dataset, which is 0.33 for the uniform dataset. Using Charikar’s distance to hash collision probability formula [3], we may compute that 

Pr( h(q) = h(⟨c⟩)) = 0 .89 at a distance of 0.33 . For some m bit compound hash function, the probability of collision is 0.89 m, which quickly approaches 0 as m grows. Therefore, the set of points retrieved by hashing q and 

⟨c⟩ becomes increasingly likely to differ. However, we have shown that those points retrieved by ⟨c⟩ are expected to be superior. To aid comparison, we also show in Table 1 the mean distances from q to its 1nn, 10nn, 100nn. We also record the mean distance to all other points in the dataset. The distribution of these distances are shown in Table 1. 

6.4 Eliminating Hash Failure Cases 

Here we demonstrate experimentally that hash failure cases are eliminated when ⟨c⟩ is used as input to a binary hash function. To show this we formulate an experiment by initially randomly drawing and excluding a set of 100 queries 

Q ⊂ X from each dataset, and subset H ⊂ H rp of 1000 random binary hash functions are drawn. For all combinations (h ∈ H) × (q ∈ Q), we measure what fraction of 100 nn (q) collide with q and ⟨c⟩. This results in 100 , 000 individual recall measurements for each dataset. A hash failure is recorded to have occurred at recall values close to 0. We report the distributions of these recall values in Figure 6 for each embedding dataset. We demonstrate that there are no instances of hash failures when ⟨c⟩ is used as input to randomly drawn binary hash functions for any embedding dataset. This experimentally reinforces the result set out in Section 4.1.1, where the correlation of hash function outputs was explained to be the cause of hash failures. In Appendix D, we further demonstrate that the average value of corr (x ∈ knn (q), y ∈ knn (q)) is approximately 0 when u = ⟨ˆc⟩.

6.5 Varying Degrees of Approximations of \knn (q)

Here we study how well instances of ⟨ˆc⟩ perform when derived from sets \knn (q) of various degrees of approximation. If a good instance of ⟨ˆc⟩ can be drawn from a weak approximation of \knn (q), then it follows that we may derive a good ⟨ˆc⟩ from the result of a coarse search using only a small number of compound hash functions. Initially, we define a quality metric κ, which we define use to quantify the quality of a given ⟨ˆc⟩:

κ def 

= || ⟨ c⟩ , ⟨ˆc⟩ || 2

|| ⟨ c⟩ , q|| 2

Under this metric, if ⟨ˆc⟩ = ⟨c⟩, κ = 0 ; this represents the best possible ⟨ˆc⟩. If ⟨ˆc⟩ = q, then κ = 1 , which represents that ⟨ˆc⟩ is expected to have equal performance to the original query. If 0 < κ < 1, then the instance of ⟨ˆc⟩ is expected to perform favourably to q, but not so well as ⟨c⟩. Any ⟨ˆc⟩ with κ > 1 is worse than the query, and is therefore of no use. Any ⟨ˆc⟩ with a κ value of less than 1 is a member of the set Φ.We record κ values of ⟨ˆc⟩ instances which were derived from sets containing k = 100 elements randomly sampled from the m-near neighbour set. We call such a set Ym. By increasing m, the set Ym will contain elements less similar to q on average. 12 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT     

> (a) Dino2 ( q)(b) Dino2 ( c)
> (c) GooAQ ( q)(d) GooAQ ( c)
> (e) GloVe ( q)(f) GloVe ( c)
> (g) Uniform ( q)(h) Uniform ( c)

Figure 6: Fraction of points in knn (q) which collide with q (left column) and c (right column). Measured using 1000 

randomly drawn hash binary functions and 100 queries. 13 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

We form an experiment by randomly drawing and excluding 250 elements from each dataset. Sets Ym with values of 

m between 100 and 5000 were then created for each query (apart from queries drawn from the uniform 200D dataset, as the value of κ grows quickly with m for this dataset; therefore we cap m = 500 for this dataset). Finally, κ values were measured from each Ym. Figure 7 shows the average κ values compared with the value of m.We show that, even when m is significantly larger than k, a useful instance of ⟨ˆc⟩ may be derived from the associated set Ym. An exception to this is the uniform 200D dataset, where the value of m can be at most twice k if a good estimate of ⟨ˆc⟩ is to be derived. This observation reinforces the findings of Appendix F, which theoretically show why taking the centroid of some \knn (q) is likely to produce some ⟨ˆc⟩ ∈ Φ.Additionally, we show that the average value of κ decreases monotonically as the quality of Ym improves. In the con-text of an LSH-based mechanism, the candidate set similarly monotonically improves as new candidates are retrieved and re-ranked. Thus, we can expect the estimate ⟨ˆc⟩ in the MQ-Forest to similarly monotonically improve as it is iteratively refined. 

# 7 Conclusion 

In this paper, we have shown that the build and query procedure of LSH-based ANN mechanisms may be improved via iterative query modification whilst leaving the build procedure entirely unchanged. We show that the procedure of iterative query modification procedure enjoys a strong statistical and geometric underpinning, as well as positive practical outcomes when applied to a suite of large, high-dimensional benchmark datasets. 

# 8 Resources 

All code used for generating results for this paper can be found at https://github.com/benclaydon/ rp-forest-moving-query/tree/unrestricted-euc .14 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

> (a) MirFlickr DINOv2
> (b) Twitter GloVe
> (c) GOOAQ
> (d) Uniform 200D

Figure 7: Average value of κ from estimating c via a random selection of 100 elements the m nearest neighbours. 15 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

# References 

[1] Alexandr Andoni, Piotr Indyk, Thijs Laarhoven, Ilya Razenshteyn, and Ludwig Schmidt. Practical and optimal lsh for angular distance. (arXiv:1509.02897), 2015. arXiv:1509.02897 [cs]. [2] Tom M Apostol and Mamikon A Mnatsakanian. Sums of squares of distances in m-space. [3] Moses S. Charikar. Similarity estimation techniques from rounding algorithms. In Proceedings of the thiry-fourth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing , STOC ’02, page 380–388. Association for Computing Machinery. [4] Ben Claydon, Richard Connor, and Alan Dearle. Learning to find good hash functions for embeddings. In 

Similarity Search and Applications , page 345–353, Cham, 2026. Springer Nature Switzerland. [5] Ben Claydon, Richard Connor, Alan Dearle, and Lucia Vadicamo. Demonstrating the efficacy of polyadic queries. In Similarity Search and Applications , page 49–56, Cham, 2025. Springer Nature Switzerland. [6] Hui Cui, Fengling Li, Lei Zhu, Jingjing Li, and Zheng Zhang. Online query expansion hashing for efficient image retrieval. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , 34(3):1941–1953, March 2024. [7] Sanjoy Dasgupta and Yoav Freund. Random projection trees and low dimensional manifolds. In Proceedings of the fortieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing , page 537–546, Victoria British Columbia Canada, May 2008. ACM. [8] Guglielmo Faggioli, Nicola Ferro, Raffaele Perego, and Nicola Tonellotto. Dimension importance estimation for dense information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , SIGIR ’24, page 1318–1328, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Association for Computing Machinery. [9] Lovedeep Gondara. Random forest with random projection to impute missing gene expression data. In 2015 IEEE 14th International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA) , page 1251–1256, Decem-ber 2015. [10] Maxim (https://math.stackexchange.com/users/491644/maxim). Distribution of joint gaussian conditional on their sum. Mathematics Stack Exchange. URL:https://math.stackexchange.com/q/2943590 (version: 2018-10-05). [11] Qiang Huang, Jianlin Feng, Yikai Zhang, Qiong Fang, and Wilfred Ng. Query-aware locality-sensitive hashing for approximate nearest neighbor search. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , 9(1):1–12, 2015. [12] Mark J. Huiskes and Michael S. Lew. The mir flickr retrieval evaluation. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM International Conference on Multimedia Information Retrieval , MIR ’08, page 39–43, New York, NY, USA, 2008. Association for Computing Machinery. [13] Piotr Indyk and Rajeev Motwani. Approximate nearest neighbors: towards removing the curse of dimensionality. In Proceedings of the thirtieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing - STOC ’98 , page 604–613. ACM Press, 1998. [14] Daniel Khashabi, Amos Ng, Tushar Khot, Ashish Sabharwal, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Chris Callison-Burch. Gooaq: Open question answering with diverse answer types. arXiv preprint , 2021. [15] Yin-Hsi Kuo, Kuan-Ting Chen, Chien-Hsing Chiang, and Winston H. Hsu. Query expansion for hash-based image object retrieval. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM international conference on Multimedia , page 65–74, Beijing China, October 2009. ACM. [16] Saar Kuzi, Anna Shtok, and Oren Kurland. Query expansion using word embeddings. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM International on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management , CIKM ’16, page 1929–1932, New York, NY, USA, 2016. Association for Computing Machinery. [17] Donghoon Lee, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Songhwai Oh. Fast and accurate head pose estimation via random pro-jection forests. In 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , page 1958–1966, Santiago, Chile, December 2015. IEEE. [18] Donghoon Lee, Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Songhwai Oh. Head and body orientation estimation using convolutional random projection forests. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 41(1):107–120, January 2019. [19] Elizaveta Levina and Peter J Bickel. Maximum likelihood estimation of intrinsic dimension. [20] Qin Lv, William Josephson, Zhe Wang, Moses Charikar, and Kai Li. Multi-probe lsh: Efficient indexing for high-dimensional similarity search. 16 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

[21] Tomas Mikolov, Kai Chen, Greg Corrado, and Jeffrey Dean. Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space. (arXiv:1301.3781), 2013. arXiv:1301.3781 [cs]. [22] Robb J. Muirhead. Aspects of Multivariate Statistical Theory . Wiley-Interscience, 2005. [23] Mervin E. Muller. A note on a method for generating points uniformly on n-dimensional spheres. Communica-tions of the ACM , 2(4):19–20, April 1959. [24] Maxime Oquab, Timoth´ ee Darcet, Th´ eo Moutakanni, Huy Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, and et al. Di-nov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision, 2023. [25] Jeffrey Pennington, Richard Socher, and Christopher D. Manning. Glove: Global vectors for word representation. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 1532–1543, 2014. [26] Joseph John Rocchio Jr. Relevance feedback in information retrieval. The SMART retrieval system: experiments in automatic document processing , 1971. [27] Xu Tan, Jiawei Yang, and Susanto Rahardja. Sparse random projection isolation forest for outlier detection. 

Pattern Recognition Letters , 163:65–73, November 2022. [28] Lucia Vadicamo, Francesca Scotti, Alan Dearle, and Richard Connor. Comparative analysis of relevance feed-back techniques for image retrieval. In Ichiro Ide, Ioannis Kompatsiaris, Changsheng Xu, Keiji Yanai, Wei-Ta Chu, Naoko Nitta, Michael Riegler, and Toshihiko Yamasaki, editors, MultiMedia Modeling , page 206–219, Singapore, 2025. Springer Nature. [29] Jinxi Xu and W. Bruce Croft. Improving the effectiveness of information retrieval with local context analysis. 

ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. , 18(1):79–112, January 2000. [30] Donghui Yan, Yingjie Wang, Jin Wang, Honggang Wang, and Zhenpeng Li. K-nearest neighbor search by random projection forests. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) , page 4775–4781, December 2018. arXiv:1812.11689 [cs, stat]. [31] Bailing Zhang. Phenotype recognition for rnai screening by random projection forest. AIP Conference Proceed-ings , 1371(1):55–64, 2011. [32] Xiang Sean Zhou and Thomas S. Huang. Relevance feedback in image retrieval: A comprehensive review. 

Multimedia Systems , 8(6):536–544, April 2003. 17 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

# A Description of Datasets 

We use four high-dimensional vector datasets of different modalities for experimentation: 1. MirFlickr is a collection of 1 million images submitted by Flickr users [12]. We encode each of these images with the DinoV2S embedder [24], which outputs 384-dimensional embeddings of each image in Euclidean space. The dissimilarity metric for this space is either Euclidean or Cosine distance. Downloadable from 

https://zenodo.org/records/15373201 .2. Twitter GloVe is a set of approximately 1.1 million word embeddings [25]. These embeddings were gener-ated by analysing word co-occurrences from Twitter posts. The dissimilarity metric for this space is either Euclidean or Cosine distance. Downloadable from https://nlp.stanford.edu/projects/glove/ .3. GOOAQ is a set of 3 million questions submitted to the Google search engine and their answers [14]. They were embedded using a sentence BERT model to produce 384 dimensional feature vectors.Downloadable at 

https://huggingface.co/datasets/sentence-transformers/gooaq .4. A uniform spherical dataset of 1 million points in 200 dimensions. Generated using the method described by Muller [23]. 

# B Statistical Model of Hyperplane Hash Function 

We derive a statistical model which describes the probability that a point u and a each member of some set of points 

knn (q) will hash collide under the family Hrp . This class of hash function is parametrised by a random hyperplane 

w passing through the origin in a random direction, which can be generated by a vector of numbers drawn from a standard Gaussian distribution. Any points which are at a greater height above w than a uniformly generated value 

a ∼ U [min (x1 ∈ X · w), max (x2 ∈ X · w)] are assigned a value of 1, and all others assigned a value of 0.To build a model of how this set of hash functions will interact with a point u and a set knn (q), we begin with the distribution which describes the set of all planes which parametrise all hash functions, as in 7. This is a standard mul-tivariate Gaussian distribution because this is the co-ordinate-wise distribution which generates random hyperplanes. 

w ∼ N (0, I) (7) We may condition the distribution of w given that u · w = b, where b ∈ R represents the height of u above w. The resultant distribution describes the subset of all planes which both pass through the origin and where u has a fixed dot product to w, thereby fixing the height of u above w. The distribution of a Gaussian conditioned on a fixed inner product with some other vector is derived clearly in [10]. A formal derivation of conditional Gaussian distributions can be found in [22]. 

w | u · w = b ∼ N (bu, I − uu T ) (8) Finally, we must model how this distribution of planes interacts with the set knn (q). Consider the set knn (q) as a 

k × d matrix A, where the ith row is the ith near neighbour of the original query, q. The matrix multiplication Aw 

will produce a vector of the form [x1 · w, x2 · w, · · · , x k−1 · w] where xi is the ith near neighbour. 

Aw | u · w = b ∼ N  Abu, A(I − uu T )AT  (9) 

∼ N  Abu, AA T − (Au )( Au )T  (10) We may alternatively write this distribution in terms of dot products. 

Aw | u · w = b ∼ N  μi = b(u · xi), Σij =  xi · xj − (xi · u)( xj · u)  , 1 ≤ i, j ≤ k (11) This multivariate Gaussian distribution models the mean and covariance of the values xi · w for all xi ∈ knn (q). The hyperplane hash function may be modelled by drawing and thresholding on a random value a:

Aw | u · w = b ∼ N  Abu, AA T − (Au )( Au )T  > a (12) Our strategy to prove that c is an optimal instance of u will be to prove that it maximises the probability that the hash of c is equal to the hash of each member of knn (q). Before these proofs, we discuss how we can simplify this distribution by eliding a in the next section. 18 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

B.1 Eliding a

Consider Equation 12. We may rewrite this expression as a convolution of a normal and 1-dimensional uniform distribution by subtracting a from both sides of the inequality: 

N  Abu, AA T − (Au )( Au )T  − a > 0

More precisely, a is distributed as a degenerate d-dimensional uniform distribution, whereby a single, fixed, uniform scalar value is drawn between min (X · w), max (X · w) (where each X is the set of points being hashed, thereby making these bounds the height of the furthest points in X above and below w), which is repeated for all dimensions. We denote this distribution U.

N  Abu, AA T − (Au )( Au )T  − U (min (X · w), max (X · w)) > 0

For ease of notation, we let X ∼ N  Abu, AA T − (Au )( Au )T  and Y ∼ U (min (X · w), max (X · w)) . We further define a new distribution Z = X − Y .

Z is the distribution which describes the probability of a member xi ∈ knn (q) and some u hash colliding, should some random function h ∈ H rp be applied. The probability mass of Z which is greater than 0 reflects the probability that xi and u hash collide, hereafter assuming without loss of generality that b is positive. Analysing only positive values of b is sufficient, as if a negative b is introduced then we may prove equivalence with the positive case as shown: 

N  A(−b)u, AA T − (Au )( Au )T  − U (min (X · w), max (X · w)) > 0= − N  Abu, AA T − (Au )( Au )T  − U (min (X · w), max (X · w)) > 0=N  Abu, AA T − (Au )( Au )T  + U (min (X · w), max (X · w)) < 0=N  Abu, AA T − (Au )( Au )T  − U (min (X · w), max (X · w)) < 0

This final step is by symmetry of the uniform distribution. This is because the co-ordinate values of the vector computed by X · w will also be Gaussian (we also used this fact to derive Equation 10). We assume that the co-ordinates of X are reasonably decorrelated; decorrelation can be achieved via dimensionality reduction, if highly correlated features exist. With this assumption, it becomes clear that the vector Aw will contain a large number of reasonably uncorrelated values. Moreover, these values are bounded between [−1, 1] . It is clear that the sample maximum will approach 1 and the sample minimum will approach −1 as X grows. The interested reader can refer to results of the generalised extreme value theorem for more concrete proofs of this claim. In the next section, we aim to prove that setting u = c maximises the probability mass of Z above 0. In outline, we show this by proving that E[Z] is maximal, and V ar (Z) is minimal. This pair of properties will minimise the total probability mass of Z below 0, and thus the probability of xi and u taking a different hash value is minimised. However, this property is very hard to prove for Z itself, due to the complexity of the distribution 2. However, we show that finding a u which maximises the expected value of X also directly implies that the u maximises the expected value of Z. Similarly, the u which minimises the variance of X directly implies it minimises the variance of Z. By showing this, we may work with the much wieldy X to prove properties of Z, greatly simplifying our derivation. To begin, recall that max (X · w) ≈ − min (X · w). We may use this fact to derive a simple mean and variance of the degenerate uniform distribution Y :

E[Y ] = 0 Σ[ Y ] = 2max (xi · w)12 Jd

where Jd is the d × d matrix of ones. To compute the mean and variance of the distribution Z, as we assume X and 

Y are independent (which is reasonable, as max (X · w) is approximately constant in a high dimensional space). We can thus rewrite the mean and variance of Z in terms of X and Y : 

> 2The author did derive the distribution of Z, but there is little to be gained from recounting it.

19 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

E[Z] = E[X] + E[Y ]=⇒ E[Z] = E[X]Σ[ Z] = Σ[ X] + 2max (xi · w)6 Jd

As the expected values of X and Z are equal, and the covariance matrix of Z is simply the covariance matrix of X

plus some constant, it follows that max (E[X]) = ⇒ max (E[Z]) , and min (V ar [X]) = ⇒ min (V ar [Z]) . Thus we work only with the much simpler distribution: 

Aw | u · w = b ∼ N  Abu, AA T − (Au )( Au )T  > 0 (13) Moreover, proving this relationship allows us to simultaneously prove properties of both Charikar’s binary hash func-tion (where a = 0 ), and the hash function used by RP-Forest (which takes a uniform value of a), as the value a has been elided. 

# C Proving c is the Best Query 

We prove that setting u = c maximises the probability of the hashes of u and some xi ∈ knn (q) colliding. This proof is split into two main parts: Theorem 1 proves that setting u = c maximises the expected value of the distribution of the distribution derived in Equation 13 if b > 0, and minimises it if b < 0. In Theorem 2, we prove that the variance of the distribution in Equation 13 is minimised if u = c. As discussed in the previous section, this pair of properties is sufficient to prove that c is maximally likely to hash collide with members of knn (q).

Theorem 1. If u = c, E(w · xi | u · w = b) is maximised if b > 0, and minimised if b < 0.Proof. As our domain of interest is ℓ2-normed spaces, we may rewrite the expectation of Equation 11 using the polarisation identity: 

b ·



1 − 12 || u − x1|| 22

1 − 12 || u − x2|| 22

...

1 − 12 || u − xk|| 22



The point u = c minimises E(|| u − xi|| 22) by Theorem 3’ of [2], thereby maximising E(1 − 12 || u − xi|| 22). Note that 

1 − 12 || u − xk|| 22 ≥ 0. As we multiply this value by b, we maximise E(xi · w) if b > 0, and minimise E(xi · w) if 

b < 0 as required. 

Theorem 2. If u = c, the trace of the covariance matrix is minimised. Proof. From Equation 11, we may write the variance of the ith near neighbour (or equivalently the i, i th element of the covariance matrix) as: 

xi · xi − (xi · u)2

As all vectors are ℓ2 normed, xi · xi = 1 :

1 − (xi · u)2

The point c is the instance of u which minimises Pki=1 d(xi, u)2. This result follows directly from the fact that it maximises E(|| u − xi|| 22); this is because in an ℓ2-normed space, the Euclidean distance metric and scalar product similarity are in perfect anticorrelation. As 0 ≤ (xi · c)2 ≤ 1, and xi · c is maximial, setting u = c minimises the sum of variances on the diagonal. 20 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

C.1 Distribution of Off-Diagonal Covariances 

We begin by formulating a model which describes the expected correlation of binary hash functions h ∈ H rp , as applied to points xi, xj ∈ knn (q). We show that this correlation value is the i, j th entry of the covariance matrix 

Σ. A correlation value of −1 represents that, for all h ∈ H rp , h(xi)̸ = h(xj ), and a correlation of +1 represents the converse. A score of 0 implies that the outcomes of the hash functions are decorrelated, and that the value h(xi)

provides no information on the value h(xj ).We define the average correlation more formally to be the mean value of Σi,j for all unique pairs i, j . If the average correlation is high, then it is likely that many or all members of knn (q) will have equal hash function output if a single function from Hrp is applied. However, q produced a different output, then hash failure occurs. To minimise the probability of hash failures, a u must be chosen which induces a low average correlation. 

Theorem 3. If u = c, the value Pk−1

> i=0

Pk−1 

> j=0

Σi,j is minimal within a bound of Pki=1 (xi · u)2.Proof. The i, j th element of the covariance matrix is defined as: 

Cov i,j = xi · xj − (xi · u)( xj · u)

Consider the sum of all each off-diagonal element of the covariance matrix: 

X

> i,j,i ̸=j

xi · xj − (xi · u)( xj · u)

As P 

> i,j

xi · xj is a constant, to minimise the sum of covariances it is sufficient to maximise the expression: 

X

> i,j,i ̸=j

(xi · u)( xj · u)

A sum of this form is an elementary symmetric polynomial of the second kind, e2. This polynomial is the sum of the product of each unique pair of items in a set (in this case, the set is {xi · u ∀i}). As Σ is symmetric, the sum of the upper and lower triangles of the matrix are equal, and the entries of the upper or lower triangle are the products of each unique pair of elements in knn (q). Therefore, we may rewrite this sum, in Newton’s notation, as: 

2e2(x0 · u, · · · , xk−1 · u)

Using Newton’s identities, we may rewrite this as: 

2 · 12 (e1(x0 · u, · · · , x k−1 · u)p1(x0 · u, · · · , x k−1 · u) − p2(x0 · u, · · · , x k−1 · u)) 

where pk is the sum of the kth power of each member of the set. Simplified, this expression becomes: 

X

> i,j,i ̸=j

(xi · u)( xj · u) = X

> i

xi · u

!2

− X

> i

(xi · u)2

We have previously shown that u = c maximises P 

> i

xi · u. Thus, setting u = c maximises the term (P 

> i

xi · u)2.As we wish to maximise the whole expression, we would also hope to minimise the term P

> i

(xi · u)2. However, this term is maximised if u = c. With this in mind, we can claim that the expression is at most P

> i

(xi · u)2 less than its maximum. In practise, this bound is quite tight. As xi · u has range [0 , 1] the term (P 

> i

xi · u)2 becomes relatively much greater than the term P

> i

(xi · u)2. In Appendix D, we show that this bound is useful practically by demonstrating that the average off-diagonal covariance is approximately 0 for various datasets. 21 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT  

> (a) GloVe (b) DINOv2
> (c) GooAQ

Figure 8: Aggregated off-diagonal covariance values when applying a large number of binary hash functions to ⟨c⟩

(blue) and q (orange) as instances of u. Measured over 100 random queries. 

# D Distribution of Off-Diagonal Covariance Values 

We demonstrate that, in practice, using u = ⟨c⟩ causes the average off-diagonal entry of the covariance matrix to be approximately 0. In Theorem 3, we proved that the sum of off-diagonal elements is almost minimal, but in the abstract it is difficult to appreciate how close to minimal this sum really is. We measure covariance matrices for a large set of queries and record their distribution. We formulate this experiment as follows: 1. For a given query, generate 1000 random hyperplanes such that u · w < 0.005 (approximating planes where 

b = 0 ). Note that the choice of b = 0 is arbitrary as the value of b does not influence the covariance as per Equation 11, but must be fixed such that the mean value is stable. 2. For each plane w, we compute the values Aw, or the height of each near neighbour above w. We store these results in D, a 1000 × 100 matrix representing the heights of the 100 nearest neighbours to the query over all 

1000 hyperplanes. 3. Finally, we measure the covariance between the columns of the matrix D. This measures the degree of correlation between xi · w and xj · w over a large sample of planes. Recall that these covariances are bounded between ±1.Figure 8 shows the distribution of all such covariances aggregated over all 200 . For all datasets, setting u = ⟨c⟩ reduces the average covariance to approximately zero, and there exist far fewer highly correlated pairs of hash functions. 22 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT   

> (a) GloVe (b) DINOv2
> (c) GooAQ (d) Uniform 200D

Figure 9: Rate of change of the candidate set after trees in an RP-Forest are searched. k = 100 .

# E Frequency of Candidate Set Updates 

Here we measure how often RP-Forest adds points to its candidate set at the ith tree such that we can measure its rate of change as more trees are searched. If this value is below k 

> 2

, then the fast query centroid algorithm set out in Section 5.3 can be used to decrease the cost of computing ⟨ˆc⟩.To measure this property, we formulate an experiment whereby an RP-Forest formed of 19 trees is constructed from each dataset. We then search the constructed forests using 100 queries drawn and excluded from each dataset at random, before each forest was constructed. After each tree in the forest is searched, we measure the number of elements which were added to the candidate set. We report this metric as ∆ − kN N . We show the average ∆ − kN N 

value after each tree is searched for all datasets in Figure 9. We show that, on average, points are added to the candidate set infrequently. Critically, we show that no dataset adds points to the candidate set at a rate of above k 

> 2

per tree beyond the first. Therefore the fast centroid computation algorithm (described in Section 5.3) can be used to decrease the cost of computing ⟨ˆc⟩.

# F A Statistical Argument for ⟨ˆc⟩

Here we present a statistical model which explains the observation that || q − c|| 2 > ||⟨ ˆc⟩ − c|| with a high probability. Recall that a smaller distance to c implies a better instance of ⟨ˆc⟩.

F.1 Definitions and Preliminaries 

To begin, we define the terms: • μ ∈ Rd: The user-provided query, previously denoted q. We rename it to μ here as we wish to emphasise the role of q as the mean value μ as required by the central limit theorem. • x0 · · · xr−1 ∈ Rd are the r near neighbours of μ.• c ∈ Rd is the centroid of the k near neighbour set of μ; {x0 · · · xk−1}.23 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

• ⟨ˆc⟩ ∈ Rd is the centroid of a random selection of k objects from the set {x0 · · · xr−1}. We denote this sample set s. We use s to model an approximation of the set knn (q) generated some coarse k-nearest neighbour search. We also assume that the set of points {x0 · · · xr−1} exist in some intrinsically m-dimensional space, and that the local density about q, which we call f (q), is approximately constant. These are the same set of assumptions made by Levina and Bickel [19] in their seminal paper deriving the maximum likelihood estimator of local intrinsic dimensionality. We refer readers to this paper for a fuller treatment of local intrinsic dimensionality A brief intuition on the meaning of local instrinsic dimensionality is as follows: for some fixed point x, the probability that some other point y exists in the dataset whereby || x − y|| 2 = t is ρV m(t), where Vm(t) is the volume of the hypersphere in m dimensions of radius t, and ρ is some normalising constant which is derived from the density f (x).In the next sections, we present three theorems which, when we combined in Section F.2, will demonstrate that 

Pr( || q − c|| 2 > ||⟨ ˆc⟩ − c|| ) is large. We begin in Theorem 4, in which we prove the distribution each co-ordinate of the vectors c − μ and ⟨ˆc⟩ − μ are normally distributed. 

Theorem 4. 

ci − μi ∼ N  0, σ 21



⟨ˆc⟩ − μi ∼ N  0, σ 22



where σ21 ≤ σ22

Proof. To begin, recall that the ith co-ordinate of c and ⟨ˆc⟩ is defined by the centroid as: 

ci =

Pk−1 

> i=0

xi

k

⟨ˆc⟩i =

Pk−1 

> i=0

Si

k

Due to our assumption that the near neighbours of μ appear uniformly and proportionally to the m-ball centred at μ,this also implies that the each co-ordinate in the vector is drawn from the same identical and independent distribution. We use the variables ξ21 and ξ22 to represent the (unknown) variances of the underlying ith co-ordinate distributions of 

ci and ⟨ˆc⟩ respectively. It is definitional that ξ21 ≤ ξ22 , as the points x0 · · · xk−1 are more tightly distributed about μ

than those points in s. As the distribution of co-ordinates of both c − μ and ⟨ˆc⟩ − μ of near neighbours is i.i.d, we may directly apply the central limit theorem generically to the ith co-ordinate (if k is large) as follows: 

√k(

Pk−1 

> i=0

xi

k − μi) d

−→ N (0 , ξ 21 )

√k(

Pk−1 

> i=0

Si

k − μi) d

−→ N (0 , ξ 22 )

Rearranging, we reach the distributions: 

(ci − μi) d

−→ N 



0, ξ21

k



(⟨ˆc⟩i − μi) d

−→ N 



0, ξ22

k



For notational simplicity hereafter, we denote σ21 = ξ21 

> k

, and σ22 = ξ22 

> k

.In Theorem 5, we use the results derived in Theorem 4 to prove that the co-ordinates of the vector (⟨ˆc⟩ − c) are also normally distributed, with a smaller variance than the co-ordinates of (μ − c).24 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

Theorem 5. The co-ordinates (⟨ˆc⟩i − ci) are also normally distributed, and V ar (⟨ˆc⟩i − ci) < V ar (μi − ci)

Proof. As (μi − ci) and (⟨ˆc⟩i − ci) are each normally distributed, we may compute their convolution as follows: 

(μi − ci) − (⟨ˆc⟩i − μi) ∼ N (0 , σ 21 + σ22 − 2Cov (μi − ci, ⟨ˆc⟩i − μi)

Due to symmetry of the Gaussian distribution about 0, we remark that the distributions of (μi − ⟨ ˆc⟩i) and (⟨ˆc⟩i − μi)

are identical. Therefore, we may rewrite the left-hand side of this equation to: 

(μi − ci) − (μi − ⟨ ˆc⟩i) ∼ N (0 , σ 21 + σ22 − 2Cov (μi − ci, ⟨ˆc⟩i − μi)

Simplifying the left hand side: 

(⟨ˆc⟩i − ci) ∼ N (0 , σ 21 + σ22 − 2Cov (μi − ci, ⟨ˆc⟩i − μi)

Previously, we assumed that the points are distributed uniformly and proportionally to the m-ball centred on μ. There-fore, we may model the sets knn (μ) and s as each having been drawn from spherical uniform distributions, where the former has been drawn from an m-ball with a radius r1, and the second drawn from an m-ball with a radius r2. In this example, r1 is the k-nearest neighbour distance from μ, and r2 is the r near neighbour threshold. A property of the spherical uniform distribution is that the variance of co-ordinates of points drawn uniformly from the m-ball is directly proportional to the radius of the ball. Therefore, as both the distributions are uniform and have the same centre, we may write (⟨ˆc⟩i − μi) as a quotient of (μi − ci).

(⟨ˆc⟩i − μi) = r1

r2

(μi − ci)

Using this fact, we may rewrite all terms of the distribution (⟨ˆc⟩i − ci) dependent on (⟨ˆc⟩i − μi) in terms of (μi − ci):

(⟨ˆc⟩i − ci) ∼ N (0 , σ 21 + r1

r2

σ21 − 2Cov (μi − ci, r1

r2

(μi − ci)) 

Recall that Cov (X, kX ) = kV ar (X). By application of this identity and collecting like terms, we derive that: 

(⟨ˆc⟩i − ci) ∼ N 



0,



1 − r1

r2



σ21



As it is definitional that r1 < r 2, it follows that V ar (⟨ˆc⟩i − ci) < V ar (ci − μ).The variance of ⟨ˆc⟩i − ci, in the context of a real ANN search, will likely be lower than what is suggested by this model. This is because we our model assumes that the sets X and S are drawn independently to one another from the uniform hyperspherical distribution. In reality, some values of S and X are likely to be identical as we are searching a finite collection of points. This will have the effect of artificially raising Cov (μi − ci, r1 

> r2

(μi − ci)) , thus decreasing 

the variance of ⟨ˆc⟩i − ci empirically. However, as we are trying to bound the variance of ⟨ˆc⟩i − ci from above, this does not trouble us. Secondly, note that as m → ∞ , r1 

> r2

→ 1. Therefore, as the intrinsic dimension increases, the variance of ⟨ˆc⟩i − ci

decreases relative to μi − ci. This property directly implies, somewhat counter-intuitively, that our query modification technique works better in higher dimensional spaces. Finally, in Theorem 6, we demonstrate that the properties derived in Theorem 5 directly imply that we should expect 

⟨ˆc⟩ to be closer to c than μ on average. It is this property that is required to claim that ⟨ˆc⟩ is superior to μ.

Theorem 6. V ar (⟨ˆc⟩i − ci) < V ar (μi − ci) = ⇒ E[||⟨ ˆc⟩ − c|| 2] < E[|| μ − c|| 2]

Proof. Begin by factoring the variance from the distributions of ⟨ˆc⟩i − μi and ci − μi, thus writing them as some multiple of a standard Gaussian distribution: 

⟨ˆc⟩i − ci ∼

q

V ar (⟨ˆc⟩i − ci)N (0 , 1) 

25 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

ci − μi ∼ pV ar (ci − μi)N (0 , 1) 

It is here we cease to consider co-ordinates, but consider the vectors c − μ and ⟨ˆc⟩ − c. As each co-ordinate is independently and identically normally distributed due our assumption of local uniformity about μ, we may derive the multivariate distribution for the vectors ⟨ˆc⟩ − mu and c − μ:

c − μ ∼ pV ar (ci − μi)N (0 , I m)

⟨ˆc⟩ − μ ∼

q

V ar (⟨ˆc⟩i − ci)N (0 , I m)

The final step is to find the expected ℓ2 norm of each vector. Recall that the ℓ2 norm of an m-dimensional standard Gaussian distribution follows the Chi distribution with m degrees of freedom. Therefore: 

|| c − μ|| 2 ∼ pV ar (ci − μi)χm (14) 

|| c − ⟨ ˆc⟩|| 2 ∼

q

V ar (⟨ˆc⟩i − ci)χm (15) Thus, as V ar (⟨ˆc⟩i − ci) < V ar (ci − μi), E[||⟨ ˆc⟩ − c|| 2] < E[|| μ − c|| 2].

F.2 Bounding the Probability Pr( || μ − c|| 2 < ||⟨ ˆc⟩ − c|| )

We may use the χm distribution derived in Theorem 6 to compute the probability that ||⟨ ˆc⟩ − c|| 2 > || μ − c|| 2. We begin by binding the two chi distributions found in Equations 14 and 15 respectively to random variables X and Y :

X ∼ χm

Y ∼ χm

Next, we construct the following ratio by dividing the distribution of ||⟨ ˆc⟩ − c|| 2 by || μ − c|| 2. If this ratio is greater than 1, then the distance from ⟨ˆc⟩ to c must be greater than μ to c3:

Pr 

pV ar (ci − μi)X

pV ar (⟨ˆc⟩i − μi)Y

!

> 1

We substitute the variances with their derived values from Theorem 5: 

Pr 

q

(1 − r1 

> r2

)σ21 X

pσ21 Y

 > 1

Which simplifies to: 

Pr 

s

1 − r1

r2

 XY

!

> 1

Recall that the Fisher–Snedecor F distribution is the quotient of two random variables with χ2 distributions. Therefore,  

> XY

∼ pF(m,m ); that is an F distribution where both of the χ2 distributions have m degrees of freedom, as they exist in an intrinsically m dimensional space. Therefore we may rewrite the probability to: 

> 3We formulate the problem in this way as it makes the resulting derivation much cleaner than subtraction, for instance.

26 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

Pr 

s

1 − r1

r2



F(m,m )

!

> 1

We may freely square both sides, and divide by the constant 1 − r1 

> r2

:

Pr( F(m,m )) > 11 − r1

> r2

The CDF of the Fm,m distribution from [−∞ , x ] is defined in terms of the regularised incomplete beta function I:

I xx+1 

 m

2 , m

2



The final step is so substitute x = 11− r1

> r2

and simplify to derive an analytic expression for probability that || c−⟨ ˆc⟩|| 2 >

|| c − μ|| 2:

Pr 

 || c − ⟨ ˆc⟩|| 2

|| c − μ|| 2

> 1



= Pr 

pV ar (ci − μi)X

pV ar (⟨ˆc⟩i − μi)Y > 1

!

= 1 − I 12− r1

> r2

 m

2 , m

2



F.2.1 Example 

We remark that, for realistic values of m, r1, and r2, then the probability that ||⟨ ˆc⟩ − c|| 2 < || μ − c|| 2 is almost certain. For example, if m = 20 and r1 

> r2

= 0 .8 (which we remark would be a very poor approximation in such a high dimensional space), then the probability Pr 

 || c−⟨ ˆc⟩|| 2 

> || c−μ|| 2

> 1



≈ 0.00035 .From such an observation, we remark that it is almost certain that an instance ⟨ˆc⟩ superior to μ can be constructed if a set of k points can be sampled from the dataset, which obey our assumptions: that they are sampled from the ‘neighbourhood’ of μ, thereby each having an approximately constant local intrinsic dimensionality m and density 

f (μ).

F.3 Practical Demonstration 

We will empirically measure the distributions of ci − μi and ci − ⟨ ˆc⟩i over a real dataset, Twitter GloVe 100D. We will demonstrate experimentally that: • The distributions of μi − ci and ⟨ˆc⟩i − μi are Gaussian. • The distribution ⟨ˆc⟩i − ci is also Gaussian, with a variance smaller than both μi − ci and ⟨ˆc⟩i − μi.• That, as a result, || c − ⟨ ˆc⟩|| 2 < || c − μ|| 2 with a high probability. 

F.3.1 Distributions of ⟨ˆc⟩ − q, ⟨ˆc⟩ − c, and ⟨ˆc⟩ − c

To demonstrate that the distributions of μi − ci and ⟨ˆc⟩i − μi are normally distributed, we formulate the following experiment: 1. Sample a subset of 250,000 points from Twitter GloVe as a dataset. 2. Sample a disjoint set of 5000 points to serve as queries. 3. For each query μ in the set: (a) Create a shifted dataset X centred on μ by subtracting μ from all members of the dataset. (b) Let knn (μ) be the k nearest neighbour set of μ. Let Y be the set of k points in X sampled uniformly from the 300 near neighbours of μ. From these sets, we derive c and ⟨ˆc⟩ by computing the centroids of the sets knn (μ) and Y respectively. As the dataset is shifted about μ, these centroids represent ⟨ˆc⟩ − μ

and c − μ respectively. (c) We also compute the vector ⟨ˆc⟩ − c.27 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

Figure 10: The distributions of co-ordinate 0 of c − q, ⟨ˆc⟩ − q, and ⟨ˆc⟩ − c over 5000 queries. 

Figure 11: The distributions of co-ordinate 0 of c and ⟨ˆc⟩ over 5000 queries. (d) For each of these three computed vectors, we report the distributions of co-ordinate 0 only. This is to show that a normal distribution is achieved for an arbitrary co-ordinate. Figure 10 shows the distribution of co-ordinate 0 of the vectors c − μ, ⟨ˆc⟩ − μ, and ⟨ˆc⟩ − c over all 5000 queries. This figure demonstrates that: • The variance of c − μ is less than that of ⟨ˆc⟩ − μ.• The distribution of co-ordinate 0 of the vector ⟨ˆc⟩ − c has an order of magnitude less variance than either 

c − μ or ⟨ˆc⟩ − μ, as predicted by our statistical model. 

F.3.2 First Co-Ordinate Distribution of c and ⟨ˆc⟩

We further provide evidence that the distributions of the first co-ordinate of c and ⟨ˆc⟩ are not themselves normal. Figure 11 shows the distribution of c and ⟨ˆc⟩ (which have not mean-shifted) derived from the same set of queries and data. We observe that these distributions are not centred on 0, and exhibits a positive skew. Thus, it cannot be that the distributions of ⟨ˆc⟩ − μ and c − μ are normal because the underlying distributions of ⟨ˆc⟩, c, and μ are themselves normal. 28 Dynamic Query Modification for Binary Locality Sensitive Hashing PREPRINT 

Figure 12: Empirical observations vs theoretical model of the distribution of co-ordinate 0 if ⟨ˆc⟩− c over 5000 separate queries. 

F.4 Empirical Demonstration of Covariance Relation 

In our analysis, we relied heavily upon the fact that σ22 = r1 

> r2

σ21 . To demonstrate this fact empirically, we formulate the following experiment; we use the same set of 5000 queries and the same 250,000 points drawn previously: 1. For each query, we measure the value r1 and r2 by measuring the largest distance from μ in both knn (μ)

and Y respectively. 2. We record the vector r2 

> r1

(c − μ). If our assumption is correct, then this distribution will be identical to that of 

⟨ˆc⟩ − μ. Again, we only consider co-ordinate 0 of each vector as their own distributions. To measure the difference in these distributions, we use a Kolgromov-Smirnov (KS) test, which measures the likeli-hood that co-ordinate 0 of the distributions r2 

> r1

(c − μ) and ⟨ˆc⟩ − μ differ. For our sample size of 5000 query points, we report a P-value of 0.97 from the KS test; that is to say that there is extremely little statistical support that the two distributions differ. Such a high value over a large sample size suggests that the assumption that σ22

> d

−→ r1 

> r2

σ21 can be observed empirically, over real embedding datasets. 

F.4.1 Verification of ⟨ˆc⟩ − c Distribution 

We also demonstrate that the the distribution N



0,



1 − r1

> r2



σ21



we previously derived describes the distribution of co-ordinates of the vector ⟨ˆc⟩ − c well. Similarly to previous experiments, we consider only co-ordinate 0 of the vector ⟨ˆc⟩ − c. Figure 12 shows the observed probability distribution of the first co-ordinate of ⟨ˆc⟩ − c, for all 5000 queries. Also plotted is the the normal distribution N



0,



1 − r1

> r2



σ21



. Both the histogram of co-ordinate values and the theoretical model are scaled such that their integral equal 1, and thus each are truly probability distributions. We find that the empirical observations align closely with the predictions provided by the model. However, as we predicted in Section F.1, we observe that the empirical distribution is slightly more concentrated around 0 than the theoretical model would suggest. This is because our theoretical analysis treats the distribution of points within 

knn (μ) and Y as independent. In a real search context, is is likely that knn (μ) and Y will contain identical vectors, as they are sampled from a finite dataset. This discrepancy explains why the variance of empirical observations is slightly below what our model implies in Figure 12. We once again stress that this practical reduction in variance is a 

positive thing, as the variance of co-ordinates of ⟨ˆc⟩ − c is correlated with the expected value of ||⟨ ˆc⟩ − c|| 2.Finally, we measured, for each query, the values ||⟨ ˆc⟩ − c|| 2 and || q − μ|| 2. Over all of the 5000 queries measured, none had the property that || c − ⟨ ˆc⟩|| 2 > || c − μ|| 2.29